Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions 

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

Eray Erturk \* 1 Fahad Kamran \* 2 Salar Abbaspourazad 2 Sean Jewell 2 Harsh Sharma 2 Yujie Li 2 Sinead Williamson 2 Nicholas J Foti † 2 Joseph Futoma † 2

Abstract

Wearable devices record physiological and behav- ioral signals that can improve health predictions. While foundation models are increasingly used for such predictions, they have been primarily applied to low-level sensor data, despite behavioral data often being more informative due to their align- ment with physiologically relevant timescales and quantities. We develop foundation models of such behavioral signals using over 2.5B hours of wear- able data from 162K individuals, systematically optimizing architectures and tokenization strate- gies for this unique dataset. Evaluated on 57 health-related tasks, our model shows strong per- formance across diverse real-world applications including individual-level classification and time- varying health state prediction. The model excels in behavior-driven tasks like sleep prediction, and improves further when combined with representa- tions of raw sensor data. These results underscore the importance of tailoring foundation model de- sign to wearables and demonstrate the potential to enable new health applications.

1\. Introduction

Consumer wearables, such as smartwatches and fitness trackers, provide rich information across diverse health do- mains, including cardiovascular health (Moshawrab et al., 2023), sleep (Bianchi, 2018), diabetes (Ahmed et al., 2022), mental health (Gomes et al., 2023), respiratory health (Channa et al., 2021), reproductive health (Lyzwinski et al., 2024), and more. A common type of prediction problem in wearables is detection, where a set of physiological, be- havioral, and/or sensor data are used to predict information

\*Equal contribution †Equal senior authors 1USC (Work done during an internship at Apple.) 2Apple Inc. Correspondence to: Joseph Futoma \<jfutoma@apple.com\>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

about a person’s current health state. An important aspect of health monitoring is detecting a static health state – for instance, whether someone has a history of smoking, has a past diagnosis of hypertension, or is on a beta-blocker. Another crucial problem is detecting a transient health state, such as the quality of someone’s sleep or whether someone is currently pregnant. A key property of the data required for these predictions is that they are typically at the temporal resolution of human behavior (e.g., days and weeks) rather than at the lower-level time scales (e.g., seconds) at which raw sensor data is collected from wearables.

Though a majority of past work has considered model- ing low-level sensor data (or simple features thereof) (Ab- baspourazad et al., 2024b; Narayanswamy et al., 2024; Ab- baspourazad et al., 2024a; Yuan et al., 2024), higher-level behavioral information from wearables such as physical ac- tivity, cardiovascular fitness, and mobility metrics, are the natural data type to help solve these detection tasks. Unlike raw sensors, these higher-level behavioral metrics are cal- culated using carefully validated algorithms derived from the raw sensors. These metrics are intentionally chosen by experts to align with physiologically relevant quantities and health states. Importantly, these data are sensitive to an individual’s behaviors, rather than being driven purely by physiology. These characteristics make behavioral data particularly promising for such health detection tasks. For example, mobility metrics that characterize walking gait and overall activity levels may be important behavioral factors to help detect a changing health state such as pregnancy.

However, behavioral data present unique challenges, includ- ing irregular sampling, missing data, and variable sampling rates across features, requiring specialized approaches for modeling. Moreover, it is common to have massive quanti- ties of unlabeled, real-world wearable data, but only have higher-quality labels on a small curated subset. This moti- vates the need for approaches to learn useful representations of these behavioral wearable data in the absence of labels.

As such, these data naturally align with foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021), where pre-training on large, di- verse datasets enables transfer learning to new tasks with limited labels. Foundation models can capture complex,

1

Figure 1. An overview of our approach to solving a wide variety of health detection tasks. We use the Apple Heart and Movement Study to develop a foundation model for irregularly sampled behavioral time series data. We systematically optimize tokenizers and architectures for our dataset to build our final model, and we find that it excels in behavior-driven tasks and provides complementary information to an existing PPG foundation model.

nonlinear interactions in wearable data, reducing the need for task-specific models and addressing the challenge of small, often weakly labeled datasets, a common limitation in wearable health research. Despite the growing interest in foundation models for wearable data, prior work has primarily focused on modeling low-level biosignals, such as photoplethysmogram (PPG), electrocardiogram (ECG), and accelerometer data (Abbaspourazad et al., 2024a; Yuan et al., 2024; Abbaspourazad et al., 2024b), or simple ex- tracted features from them (Narayanswamy et al., 2024). These signals, while valuable, are not consistently available throughout the day, limiting their applicability across di- verse health detection problems. In contrast, behavioral data provide complementary insights by capturing broader pat- terns of health and activity. Integrating behavioral data with raw sensor signals offers a holistic view of an individual’s health, enabling models to generalize across a wider range of detection problems.

In this work, to realize the goal of accurate health detection we develop a wearable health behavior foundation model (WBM). WBM is trained on behavioral data from wearables, using 162K participants with over 15 billion hourly measure- ments from the Apple Heart and Movement Study (MacRae, 2021; Shapiro et al., 2023). Our model development process was guided by an understanding of the unique challenges posed by behavioral data, such as irregular sampling and missingness. We conducted a principled exploration of existing state-of-the-art approaches from past literature in wearables and time series modeling to understand and test which existing solutions would translate best to our unique data, resulting in a single performant model. We systemat- ically evaluate WBM on 57 health-related detection tasks, including both existing and novel tasks that span a variety of medical domains. We demonstrate our foundation model’s ability to encode important health information, outperform- ing a strong baseline and complementing an existing PPG foundation model. See Figure 1 for a high-level summary of our work.

Our key contributions include: 1) Strong performance of behavioral data for health detection: We demonstrate WBM’s generalizability and real-world utility across di- verse health detection tasks. 2) Integrating behavioral and sensor data: We show that incorporating WBM as a model of behavioral data improves upon an existing PPG foundation model across most tasks, highlighting their com- plementary strengths. 3) Developing a foundation model for wearables behavioral data: We outline the design and development of the first large-scale foundation model for irregularly sampled behavioral time series data.

2\. Related Work

2.1. Foundation Models for Wearable Sensors

Recent work has demonstrated the success of large-scale pre- training of foundation models via self-supervised learning (SSL) on low-level wearable sensor data, such as PPG, ECG, and accelerometer signals, to create general-purpose, accu- rate models (Abbaspourazad et al., 2024a; Narayanswamy et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Abbaspourazad et al., 2024b; Xu et al., 2024). These models are typically trained on raw sensor streams or extracted signal features from low-level sensors, leveraging SSL objectives to capture rich represen- tations of biosignals. Our work is complementary, focusing instead on modeling higher-level behavioral data derived from wearables, such as activity and mobility metrics, which are more computationally efficient and on more physiolog- ically relevant timescales for many health detection tasks. Merrill & Althoff (2023) is the only prior work we are aware of that has explored SSL methods on behavioral data, but it was limited to only three variables (heart rate, step count, and a sleep/wake flag) on a small dataset of 5.2K individu- als. In contrast, we model a more diverse set of behavioral signals derived from wearables, using a large-scale dataset with tens of millions of participant-weeks, enabling more robust and generalizable foundation models.

2

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

2.2. Foundation Models for Time Series

Behavioral data from wearables can be represented as a mul- tivariate time series, but poses unique challenges compared to traditional time series, including higher rates of missing data, irregular sampling, and varying sampling frequencies across variables. Foundation models for time series are an active area of research, particularly for forecasting and anomaly detection tasks in domains such as finance, en- ergy, and climate (Woo et al., 2024; Garza & Mergenthaler- Canseco, 2023; Ansari et al., 2024; Rasul et al., 2023). These approaches generally use a decoder-only approach. However, as we are not interested in forecasting or predict- ing the wearable data itself, we focus on an encoder-only framework for learning meaningful representations.

Despite the progress in time series foundation models, few methods directly address the challenges posed by wearable behavioral data. Irregular time series modeling approaches have often been explored in the context of electronic health records and clinical time series (Chowdhury et al., 2023; Shukla & Marlin, 2021; Tipirneni & Reddy, 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Labach et al., 2023), which do not generally capture behavioral information despite having other com- monalities in terms of missingness and irregularity. We con- sider approaches from this past work, conducting principled ablations to find the best model for our data by combining these ideas with other state-of-the-art sequence architec- tures, such as the Mamba-2 architecture (Gu & Dao, 2023; Dao & Gu, 2024) which have shown promise for healthcare applications (Fallahpour et al., 2024; Wornow et al., 2024).

3\. Data

We use a variety of wearable data collected under informed consent from participants in the Apple Heart and Move- ment Study (AHMS) (MacRae, 2021; Shapiro et al., 2023; Truslow et al., 2024), an ongoing real-world observational cohort study exploring the relationship between cardiovascu- lar measures, activity, and outcomes. Sponsored by Apple Inc in partnership with the American Heart Association and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, AHMS includes over 278,000 participants with up to 5 years of longitudinal data. Participants, who are U.S. residents aged 18+, provide in- formed consent using the Apple Research app (Truslow et al., 2024) and control the types of data they share. The dataset comprises wearable-derived metrics from the Apple Watch and iPhone, and health outcomes from surveys and medical records. To our knowledge, this is the largest and most diverse wearable data utilized to date (Bycroft et al., 2018; Denny et al., 2019; Merrill et al., 2023).

Our work focuses on 27 interpretable HealthKit quantities1 that are calculated from lower-level sensors using validated

1https://developer.apple.com/documentation/healthkit/hkquantitytype

methods. These metrics encode both physiological and behavioral information. Compared to modeling raw sen- sor data, these derived metrics are chosen by experts due to their alignment with meaningful physiological health states, making these metrics particularly suited for down- stream modeling tasks. For example, VO2Max, a measure of cardiovascular fitness estimated from outdoor workouts, reflects both behavioral patterns (e.g. exercise intensity) and cardiovascular health. Other metrics, such as step count, primarily encode behavioral activity.

Below, we group the metrics into categories based on the types of information they capture. Throughout this paper, we refer to these as behavioral data or behavioral health quantities. However, for some variables, such as cardiovas- cular and vital signs, the measurements reflect a combina- tion of underlying physiology and behavior. For example, exertion (a behavior) increases heart rate, but heart rate itself is also a direct physiological signal. A complete description of each variable and its availability is provided in Appendix Table 3.

Activity (8 variables): active energy (estimated calories burned), basal energy, step count (phone and watch), ex- ercise time, standing time, and flights climbed (phone and watch).

Cardiovascular (4 variables): resting heart rate, walking heart rate average, heart rate, and heart rate variability.

Vitals (3 variables): respiratory rate (overnight only), blood oxygen, and wrist temperature (overnight).

Gait / mobility (8 variables): walking metrics (speed, step length, double support percentage, asymmetry percentage, and steadiness score), stair ascent/descent speed, and fall count.

Body Measurements (2 variables): body mass and BMI.

Cardiovascular Fitness / Functional Capacity (2 vari- ables): VO2max and six minute walk distance, both clini- cally validated measures of fitness and capacity.

While AHMS is one of the largest wearable research datasets collected to date, the study cohort is not fully representa- tive of the broader U.S. population. Participants are iPhone and Apple Watch users who voluntarily opted into a digital research study, which may introduce selection bias related to socioeconomic status, technology access, and health en- gagement. Additionally, despite the large cohort size, cer- tain demographic groups, such as women, older adults, and racial and ethnic minorities remain underrepresented. The demographics of the cohort used to train our foundation model can be found in Appendix Table 6. These considera- tions are important when interpreting results and assessing generalizability. Nonetheless, the scale and richness of the data make it uniquely well-suited for developing foundation

3

Figure 2. The final WBM embedding pipeline for an individual’s behavioral data. The input data is irregularly sampled, both within a specific variable and across all 27 variables. We transform this into a dense matrix of weekly data, where each row is an hour of data. We also include a missingness mask (not shown) for each variable across the week, resulting in a 168 × 54 matrix. We project each hour as a patch using a single linear layer, and use the resulting patches as input to Mamba-2. Finally, we average the Mamba-2 outputs across time to create a single embedding for an individual’s week of data.

models of human physiology and behavior from wearable sensors, as we describe in the next section.

4\. Developing a Foundation Model

To improve predictions on a wide variety of health detection tasks, we developed a foundation model capable of encoding an individual’s health and behavioral data over a time win- dow into a single embedding. In Figure 2, we showcase the model architecture and tokenizer that we found performed best. In the remainder of this section, we discuss the motiva- tion and empirical analysis that led us to particular dataset and modeling choices.

4.1. Pre-training Dataset

We created the pre-training dataset by aggregating behav- ioral health data at hourly intervals, aligning with our goal of detecting health states over longer time scales. Hourly aggregation promotes consistency across variables with un- even sampling rates, and is also a common design decision in prior work (Lipton et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020). Driven by our goal of detecting health states at a temporal resolution of human behavior, weekly windows of aggregated hourly data were chosen as model inputs, bal- ancing prediction granularity, actionability, and scalability.

The final dataset consists of 15.14 million weeks of data (∼2.5B hours) from 161,855 unique participants, filtered for adequate watch wear (see Appendix A.1.1 for details). Data irregularity stems from variable sampling rates, missing data, and participant-specific inconsistencies. We report detailed statistics on variable availability in Appendix A.1.1 and Table 3. We use the same 80% / 10% / 10% participant- level splits for training, validation, and testing for both pre-training and downstream tasks.

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

4.2. Model Training

The irregularity of our data significantly differs from typical biosignals, necessitating a comprehensive investigation into what techniques work best. Moreover, as this type of behav- ioral data has not been previously used to build foundation models, there is no direct prior knowledge to inform either the best methods for tokenizing variables as inputs nor the best backbone architectures. As such, we perform a princi- pled empirical exploration of different input tokenizers and model backbones most appropriate for our data.

Input Tokenizers Understanding how to correctly represent the data is critical for handling irregularly sampled data. A tokenizer maps an individual’s week of data to a sequence of vectors that can be used as input to a deep learning model. We consider three tokenizers that can be applied to our input data. We provide a brief overview in this section, and leave specific implementation details to Appendix A.3.

TST. First, we consider a dense approach for modeling a week of an individual’s data inspired by the Time Series Transformer (TST) approach (Zerveas et al., 2021). We create a 168 × 27 matrix for each hour in the week and all 27 variables. For each of the 27 variables, we crudely impute missing hours with a global average value (i.e., zero as we use z-scored inputs). Though we tried more sophis- ticated versions of imputation (e.g., subject-level averages or weekly averages), the simpler global average resulted in the best performance in initial experiments. We also con- catenate missingness indicators for each variable, resulting in a 168 × 54 feature matrix. We treat each hour of data as a patch, and use a multi-layer perceptron with one hidden layer to map each patch to an embedding vector (Zerveas et al., 2021). This sequence of vectors can then be used as input to a backbone deep learning model.

mTAN. Next, we consider using multi-time attention (mTAN) with masking to appropriately handle missing data. We use the same 168 × 54 feature matrix from TST as input to a mTAN network, akin to past work (Chowdhury et al., 2023; Shukla & Marlin, 2021). mTAN returns a sequence of embedding vectors that can then be used as input to a backbone deep learning model.

Tuple. Finally, we consider a non-dense approach that treats each observation of data as a tuple containing time (i.e., hour in week measurement was taken), variable type, and numerical value. We adapt techniques from past work which learn one-to-many mappings from scalar-valued time- and variable-values to a higher dimensional embedding, and use an embedding lookup table to map each categorical variable type to higher dimensions (Tipirneni & Reddy, 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Labach et al., 2023). Adding these three embeddings results in a single input token for each hourly variable measurement. Missing values are naturally

4

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

handled, as variables that were not measured at a given hour are simply omitted. The sequence of all tokens can then be used as input to a backbone deep learning model.

Backbone Model Architectures. Given input tokens of the irregularly sampled data, we describe a few popular sequence-to-sequence architectures to learn meaningful rep- resentations. All models take in a sequence of embedding tokens, and return an output sequence of the same length. To obtain a single output embedding, we average across time over all output embeddings of the model. We provide a brief overview, but leave details to Appendix A.4.

Self-Attention Transformer. Given the irregularity of our input data and the strong results of Transformers across dif- ferent modalities, including wearable data, we first consider using a Transformer to learn representations of the data (Vaswani et al., 2017). Given the importance of represent- ing temporal aspects of the signals, we pay special attention to positional encodings. First, we consider standard self- attention techniques with learnable position encodings.

Rotary Transformer. Absolute positions may matter less than relative positions when working with temporal data such as wearable signals. Hence, we also explore the util- ity of using relative position encodings. In particular, we consider Rotary Position Embeddings (RoPE), due to their strong performance compared to other variants, and strong theoretical properties that show their ability to flexibly en- code both absolute and relative encodings (Shaw et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2021; Dufter et al., 2022; Su et al., 2024).

Mamba-2. Continuous time state-space models are natural choices for handling irregularly sampled time series data due to their learned discretization step sizes. Specifically, we consider the recent strand of selective state-space mod- els known as Mamba, as they are efficient, more flexible than classical state-space models, and have been shown to be competitive with Transformers for language modeling (Gu & Dao, 2023; Dao & Gu, 2024). We consider using Mamba-2 as a backbone architecture to learn downstream representations. We apply a bi-directional Mamba-2 archi- tecture as in past work using state-space models for time series, allowing the representations to summarize informa- tion in both the forward and backward directions (Wang et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024).

Pre-Training Loss. We use a regularized contrastive ob- jective as our SSL pre-training loss. Similar contrastive ob- jectives have achieved strong performance in health-related time-series signals (Jeong et al., 2023), and in learning performative foundation models from wearable signals (Ab- baspourazad et al., 2024a). Due to the importance of captur- ing sparse but informative variables (e.g., VO2max), we do not consider a masked autoencoder pre-training framework. These techniques require the model to be able to recreate all

portions of the input signal, which may both overemphasize observed variables and be unnecessarily stringent. Though such a task is useful for imputation and interpolation, these tasks are not a focus of this work. In Appendix A.5.3, we show the poor performance of a masked autoencoder in ini- tial experiments, further motivating the use of contrastive approaches in downstream health detection tasks. Though other SSL objectives exist and may be suitable, we leave an exploration of these non-contrastive approaches to future work.

We use a subject-level positive sampling contrastive objec- tive (see Appendix A.4.1 for further details), which has been shown to learn informative representations for many of the same health detection tasks we are interested in (Ab- baspourazad et al., 2024a). To encourage learning meaning- ful representations, we sample pairs of augmented segments (i.e., weeks of data) from the same individual. To create the augmented segments, we use input token dropping. Specifi- cally, we consider dropping p% of tokens across time prior to learning representations during training.

4.3. Tuning and Best Model Creation

To create a final performant foundation model, we train ev- ery combination of tokenization (Tuple, mTAN, and TST) and architecture (Self-Attention Transformer, Rotary Trans- former, Mamba-2) using the regularized contrastive loss. We perform a grid search over all 9 combinations, tuning a subset of parameters for each model, including batch size, KoLeo regularization amount (Sablayrolles et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020), weight decay, and number of layers (see Appendix A.5.1 for details). To choose between these differ- ent models, we train and evaluate the learned embeddings on the representative downstream task of age prediction. As age is predictive of many health conditions, the task of age prediction is often used to measure the quality of learned embeddings (Abbaspourazad et al., 2024a; Narayanswamy et al., 2024).

Overall, we find that most models perform well on the down- stream age task on the held-out validation set (Appendix Table 9), with the combination of the simple TST tokeniza- tion and Mamba-2 backbone achieving the lowest error. We hypothesize that TST tokenization outperformed more so- phisticated tokenization methods due to the high level of noise in the data and significant aggregation done in prepro- cessing, such that the naive imputation of missing variables using a population global mean was sufficient. Despite the prevalence of Transformers for building foundation mod- els for wearable data, we found that a Mamba-2 backbone resulted in the best model. Importantly, all models were given the same hyperparameter budget, and the best model was not always the largest model. Moreover, we capped the number of layers for Mamba-2 in this initial exploration to the largest Transformer that could fit in memory due to

5

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

the attention calculation. Despite this, we found the TST and Mamba-2 combination consistently resulted in the best model across other downstream tasks as well (see Appendix Table 10).

Given this initial finding, we perform a larger hyperparame- ter search using a Mamba-2 backbone with TST tokeniza- tion to create the final foundation model, which we denote WBM. Figure 2 shows the full process of going from an individual’s input data to an output embedding that can be used for downstream tasks. Though we are unable to release model weights and code due to the specifics of the informed consent for participants in the study, Section A.5.1 contains all training details and final model configuration. For more details, interested parties can reach out to the authors.

5\. Downstream Evaluation of Learned

Foundation Model

Table 1. Performance of embeddings on age and sex prediction with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals in parenthesis. The com- bination of WBM and PPG consistently performs best.

Embedding Age (MAE) Biological Sex (AUROC) Baseline 7.89 (6.66, 10.31) 0.931 (0.928, 0.934) WBM 3.67 (3.63, 3.71) 0.999 (0.999, 0.999) PPG 2.89 (2.86, 2.93) 0.997 (0.996, 0.997) WBM + PPG 2.46 (2.43, 2.50) 0.999 (0.999, 1.000)

We now aim to understand whether the learned WBM em- beddings encode meaningful information for a wide variety of health detection tasks.

5.1. Downstream Tasks

Motivation. The central research question driving our work is whether WBM encodes enough information to enable strong predictive performance across a wide range of health detection tasks. Prior work in the wearables space has largely focused on activity recognition and exercise detec- tion tasks from sensor data (Narayanswamy et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024) or on single disease states or conditions (Merrill & Althoff, 2023), and do not comprehensively eval- uate on a wide variety of different types of health conditions. Given the unique nature of our large-scale observational study, we have access to a much wider variety of potential health, wellness, and medication outcomes via comprehen- sive longitudinal health surveys and medical records. This allows us to better assess the generalizability of our models to detect a larger variety of meaningful health states that might provide individuals actionable insights. We build on prior work that demonstrated promising performance of foundation models trained on low-level physiological sig- nals like PPG and ECG for static health classification tasks (Abbaspourazad et al., 2024a). In this study, we not only adopt those same benchmarks but also introduce novel tasks

involving time-varying health states. Our hypothesis is that WBM and PPG capture complementary aspects of health, and that combining them will yield the best predictive per- formance across most tasks.

Experimental Set-Up. We use linear probing (with a ridge penalty) to fit downstream models using WBM’s embed- dings as predictors for each downstream task. Models are fit either on a per-week or per-participant basis, as appropriate. We use the same participant-level splits as in pre-training (80%/10%/10%), combining validation and test sets to yield 80/20% train/test splits, and apply internal cross validation to select a good penalty parameter for each linear model. We also compute 95% bootstrap confidence intervals, and use these to compare different models.

Baseline Models. As a simple baseline, we use the mean and standard deviation of each of the 27 health behavior variables as a way to summarize each week of data, rather than using a learned model embedding. To fit participant- level models, similar to averaging week-level embeddings, we average these week-level vectors of statistics across all weeks of available data for a participant. For all downstream tasks except age and sex prediction, we also include relevant demographic information (i.e., age, sex, and BMI) as inputs. We denote this combination of statistics and demographics as “Baseline”. Comparing against such simple baseline fea- tures shows the utility of foundation models over a typical simple supervised approach for our data. We also com- pare against a PPG foundation model (which we denote as “PPG”) from prior work (Abbaspourazad et al., 2024a), as they showed extremely strong performance on many down- stream health detection tasks. Comparing against a PPG model allows us to examine situations where modeling be- havioral data may be of more benefit than modeling lower- level sensor data. Finally, we create what we expected to be the strongest model by combining embeddings from the PPG model with WBM, to show the complementary na- ture of modeling behavioral data and lower-level sensor data. Specifically, we combine WBM and PPG embeddings by concatenating the two resulting embedding vectors into one single embedding vector that can be used as input for downstream models.

Task Details. To comprehensively evaluate our foundation model’s ability to enable diverse health detection applica- tions, we selected downstream tasks that fall into two broad categories: inter-subject (i.e., static) and intra-subject (i.e., dynamic or time-varying) detection tasks.

Inter-subject tasks involve predicting stable attributes or baseline conditions across individuals, such as demographic variables or medical history at the time of enrollment. These tasks allow us to benchmark performance against prior foun- dation modeling work in wearables (Abbaspourazad et al., 2024a), ensuring comparability and reproducibility. In par-

6

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

Table 2. Performance of embeddings on time-varying health detection (AUROC) and sleep regression (R2) tasks with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals below in parenthesis. The combination of WBM and PPG consistently yields the best performance.

Embeddings (AUROC)

Diabetes

Sleep Duration (R2)

Sleep Efficiency (R2)

Deep Sleep Duration (R2)

REM Sleep Duration (R2) Baseline (0.729, 0.737

0.744)

Pregnancy (AUROC)

Infection (AUROC)

Injury (AUROC) 0.804 (0.795, 0.813)

0.632 (0.626, 0.638)

0.608 (0.605, 0.611)

0.104 (0.093, 0.112)

0.131 (0.127, 0.135)

0.172 (0.168, 0.176)

0.128 (0.124, 0.131) WBM (0.758, 0.765

0.772)

0.864 (0.855, 0.873)

0.749 (0.744, 0.755)

0.680 (0.677, 0.683)

0.590 (0.587, 0.594)

0.424 (0.419, 0.429)

0.266 (0.261, 0.270)

0.326 (0.322, 0.331) PPG (0.823, 0.829

0.836)

0.873 (0.865, 0.882)

0.730 (0.725, 0.735)

0.673 (0.671, 0.676)

0.110 (0.106, 0.114)

0.182 (0.178, 0.186)

0.327 (0.323, 0.331)

0.230 (0.226, 0.235) WBM + PPG (0.822, 0.828

0.834)

0.921 (0.914, 0.928)

0.763 (0.757, 0.768)

0.688 (0.685, 0.691)

0.601 (0.598, 0.605)

0.438 (0.433, 0.443)

0.383 (0.379, 0.387)

0.393 (0.388, 0.397)

Baseline WBM PPG WBM + PPG

0.9

e saesidy retrAs isoropoetsOe

ruliaft raeHk cattat raeHr

ekamecaPe

saesidt raeHb

ifAr

ekomse vitcAe

enK/piHs

citohcysp-itnAs

etebaiDs

rekcolb-ateBs tnalugaocitnAy

htaporueNy

ranirUs rekcolbl ennahc-muiclaCBaseline a enpap eelSs

rotibihni-ECAe russerpd oolBs rellikniapd ioipOs

itirhtrAs

teletalpitnAr

ecnaCA

ITr oe kortSy

teixnAs

tnasserpeditnAn oisserpeDDisease or Medication n oitacidemy nan Ol oretselohCd

ioryhTs itihcnorbc inorhCr eviLOutcome s citeruiDr

edrosidk ceNy

teixna-itnAn

iaPg

niraeH. deme russerpd oolBy endiKy

parehtomehCk

cabr ewoLn oitacidemp eelS0.8 m htyhrt raeHy grellA0.7 0.6

n oisiVa

mhtsAs rellikniaPFigure 3. Results for predicting baseline medical history and medications (AUROC). The learned representations from WBM achieve strong performance and consistently outperform the baseline. Furthermore, the combination of WBM and PPG performs best in almost every task, demonstrating the complementarity of behavioral data and sensor data for health detection tasks. See Appendix Table 26 for the exact numbers for each model and task.

ticular, we include age and biological sex prediction, as they serve both as widely-used proxies for general health status and as sanity checks for representation quality, since well-trained embeddings should reliably encode this infor- mation. While there is some potential for label leakage, given that certain WBM input variables are derived from algorithms that explicitly incorporate age and sex, we con- sider this acceptable in context, as these tasks are primarily used for validation rather than as potential deployment tar- gets. Furthermore, inter-subject predictions may be useful in real-world settings for digital health personalization or screening applications, where quickly inferring baseline characteristics without requiring detailed input from users can improve usability and accessibility.

Intra-subject tasks, by contrast, are designed to test whether our model can track meaningful within-person variation over time, capturing transient or emerging health states. These tasks are unique to our work and highlight an important use case for wearables: continuous monitoring and detection of dynamic conditions. For example, we frame respiratory in- fection detection as a weekly classification problem, where the model must distinguish healthy vs. sick periods using historical behavior and physiology data. Other intra-subject

tasks include detecting weekly sleep quality metrics, dia- betes status via HbA1c labs, self-reported pregnancy, and injury states. These tasks probe whether the learned repre- sentations are sensitive enough to detect changes in health trajectories, a core capability for preventive and personal- ized digital health technologies.

Together, this diverse task suite enables us to evaluate both the generalizability of our model across individuals and its temporal sensitivity within individuals. It spans multiple health domains and leverages both behavioral and physiolog- ical modalities, providing a rigorous assessment of WBM’s utility as a foundation model for real-world health detection.

Full details on preprocessing and task setup can be found in Appendix A.6.1.

5.2. Results and Key Takeaways

Table 1 contains the demographics prediction results, Fig- ure 3 contains the baseline medical history and medication results, and Table 2 contains the intra-subject results. Ad- ditional results within demographic subgroups for a select number of tasks can be found in Appendix A.6.2.

7

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

Foundation models of behavioral data encode substantial health information. WBM achieves strong performance across all tasks. Notably, WBM substantially outperforms the simple supervised baseline on all demographic tasks. Moreover, WBM is consistently strongly predictive of most baseline disease and medication health outcomes, and usu- ally outperforms the simple baseline. In total, WBM out- performs the baseline in 39 out of 47 outcomes, with a median AUROC improvement of 0.017 in these outcomes and a statistically significant improvement in 30 out of 47 outcomes. In the eight outcomes in which the baseline model performs best, WBM is still competitive (median AUROC deficit of 0.008). Finally, WBM is able to achieve strong results across intra-subject tasks as well, statistically significantly outperforming the baseline model in all 8 time- varying health detection tasks. As a sanity check, we also show that WBM accurately reconstructs the weekly mean values for most of the 27 variables considered, including a majority of the sparser input variables such as mobility metrics, in the Appendix Table 11.

Behavioral wearable data contains more signal than low- level sensor data for some tasks. WBM outperforms the PPG model across several tasks, especially those where we expect behavioral information should provide extra signal. This is most apparent in the sleep tasks, where WBM re- sults in consistent performance improvements. This is not surprising – behavioral data capture information from ev- ery hour of the week, including overnight periods, where we can infer how long someone was asleep by periods of inactivity (e.g., from step count, exercise minutes, and heart rate). However, PPG does not provide as comprehensive a view of an individual’s week, since it is only measured a few times each day. WBM also provides gains in other tasks such as infection and injury, where behavioral data may provide additional information about an individual’s activity that results in more accurate models compared to lower-level PPG sensors (e.g., gait and mobility metrics will likely change after a lower limb injury). WBM also outperforms PPG on 18 of the 47 baseline disease and medi- cation outcomes, including four with statistically significant differences. Notably, WBM achieves better performance in predicting beta blocker use, which is consistent with its ability to more reliably detect heart rate reductions through- out the day, information that may be missed by the more sporadic measurements of PPG.

Low-level sensor data outperforms behavioral data in tasks where physiological information is sufficient. There are many tasks in which the lower-level PPG data is suf- ficient, and so lower-level physiology provides enough in- formation to achieve strong performance. This is most ap- parent in the time-varying diabetes task, where the PPG model outperforms all others, including when combined with the behavioral data foundation model. This also occurs

consistently when performing subject-level classification of baseline disease or medication outcomes (29 out of 47 outcomes with a median performance gain of .017 and 18 significant performance improvements), as the aggregation of every PPG over the study is sufficient for detecting many baseline outcomes. This is clear when looking at the out- come of antidepressants, where PPG excels as shown in past work (Abbaspourazad et al., 2024a), and behavioral data provides only marginal improvements.

Models of behavioral data provide complementary in- formation to models of low-level sensor data. Finally, we see that across most tasks, the combination of embeddings of WBM and the PPG model result in the most accurate models. The combination achieves the best age prediction performance across all models considered, clearly outper- forming either model in isolation. This trend also holds for participant-level baseline disease and medication outcome prediction, where the combination of both modalities almost always improves upon the best single modality. In total, the combination performs best in 42 out of 47 outcomes, with a median AUROC improvement of 0.009 in these outcomes and with many results being statistically significant (38 over WBM and 33 over PPG). Combining the behavioral data with PPG results in substantial gains over PPG alone in many tasks, most notably in predicting Afib (AUROC gain of 0.034), beta-blockers (AUROC gain of 0.055), and calcium-channel blockers (AUROC gain of 0.033). Finally, the combination of modalities remains the best model in every time-varying health state prediction task except dia- betes, where PPG alone was sufficient. The combination is remarkably performant for pregnancy prediction, where the combination of both data types achieves an AUROC over 0.9 and provides a relative improvement of about 0.05 over each modality alone. Pregnancy results in substantial changes in both the underlying physiology of an individual, as tracked by raw sensors, and substantial changes to an individual’s behavior, as measured by derived metrics like exercise minutes, step counts, and gait. Hence, this task acts as a clear example of the complementary nature of modeling both types of data. Combining behavioral data with PPG also improves performance in all sleep-related tasks, and in detecting infection (AUROC gain of 0.033) and detecting injury (AUROC gain of 0.015).

6\. Discussion

This work built performant predictive models for meaning- ful health detection tasks. We approached this problem by building WBM, a foundation model trained on the largest and most diverse wearables dataset to date. Specifically, we considered quantities that capture individuals’ behaviors and are derived from low-level sensor data collected from wearables. These types of quantities typically are computed

8

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

using carefully validated algorithms trained from limited be- spoke data. The quantities are also known to relate to many health detection tasks. Focusing on these derived quantities circumvents a model needing to learn these relationships – which may not even be possible using the observational datasets used in this and other work.

The derived behavioral quantities that we model differ from the sensor data (or simple features thereof) considered in previous works due to irregularity, with different sampling frequencies and large amounts of missingness driven by behavior. As such, we performed a principled search over tokenization strategies and model architectures. The fact that the best-performing tokenizer was the TST approach that produced a dense input format is somewhat surprising, since we found that imputing missing values by the global mean across all subjects rather than using subject-specific means worked better. We hypothesize that this may be due to high levels of noise when estimating variable means for some subjects, and in future work it is worth exploring if more complex model-based methods for imputation might perform even better. Another surprising finding was that the bi-directional Mamba-2 architecture produced the best model for our tasks and data, given the ubiquity of the trans- former architecture. This motivates further developments of state-space models for encoder-only foundation models of time series and sensor data. A key takeaway of our process is that when developing foundation models in the health space it is crucial to evaluate all approaches when using new types of data, and not to assume previous models will necessarily be the best for your problem and data.

We tested our model across a suite of tasks that are repre- sentative of real-world health detection problems – some from previous work and others novel. We demonstrated that models of behavioral data encode significant information about an individual’s health, outperforming models derived from low-level sensors such as PPG in tasks where behavior is a meaningful predictor (e.g., sleep and injury detection), and complementing these models across a majority of other tasks by improving the predictive performance of the joint PPG + WBM model. These results expand the foundation modeling paradigm to derived behavioral quantities benefit- ing a breadth of real-world health detection tasks.

This work focused specifically on incorporating individu- als’ behaviors into predictive models for health detection tasks using a specific dataset and thus has limitations. We cannot say how well the specific model we developed will perform on other datasets, particularly when data is not col- lected with Apple devices (e.g., Apple Watch and iPhone). Another limitation is that the contrastive self-supervised loss requires defining positive and negative pairs which can be arduous and may affect the types of downstream tasks the learned representations can address. While our initial

experiments with masked autoencoder training were not promising, we suspect this may be due to the high degree of noise present in behavior data, and hypothesize that joint embedding predictive architectures might perform better. Moreover, as many of our downstream task labels come from self-reported surveys, some labels may be inaccurate. Finally, WBM is not designed to forecast future health states from an individual’s history.

If developed and deployed safely and responsibly, predic- tive models built on wearable data like WBM hold signifi- cant promise for clinical impact. By enabling continuous, non-invasive monitoring and early detection of meaningful health events, such models could support more proactive and personalized care—particularly for conditions where behavioral signals are strong early indicators. In the fu- ture, these approaches could complement clinical decision- making, help triage patients for follow-up, or support just- in-time interventions, especially in populations where tradi- tional healthcare access is limited. Realizing this potential will require careful attention to model fairness, calibration, interpretability, and robust validation across diverse cohorts.

Impact Statement

Our work is focused on enhancing health detection tasks by modeling behavioral data from wearable devices. Given our focus on wearables, we acknowledge the potential societal impact of deploying advanced health prediction models given data from wearables. Improving these prediction models may exacerbate equity gaps between individuals with access to wearable devices to those without. It remains essential to consider ways to democratize the benefits and findings of our work to other forms of data and devices that ensure equity across different groups. Moreover, as our ultimate goal is to perform predictions that may inform health-related decisions, our work has potential for positive societal consequences. It is important to further evaluate our models in terms of actionability to best realize this goal.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank participants in the Apple Heart and Movement Study, Calum MacRae, and study staff at The Brigham and Women’s Hospital, a Harvard affiliate, with- out whom this work would not have been possible. We are grateful to Anshuman Mishra and Valerie Marchenko for important contributions to the data processing, training, and evaluation infrastructure. We also thank Andy Miller, Guillermo Sapiro, Ian Shapiro, Jen Block, and the anony- mous reviewers for providing valuable feedback, and Lind- say Hislop, Eduardo Martinez Montes and Laura Rhodes for publication coordination help.

9

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

References

Abbaspourazad, S., Elachqar, O., Miller, A., Emrani, S., Nallasamy, U., and Shapiro, I. Large-scale training of foundation models for wearable biosignals. In Interna- tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a.

Abbaspourazad, S., Mishra, A., Futoma, J., Miller, A. C., and Shapiro, I. Wearable accelerometer foundation mod- els for health via knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11276, 2024b.

Ahmed, A., Aziz, S., Abd-Alrazaq, A., Farooq, F., and Sheikh, J. Overview of artificial intelligence–driven wear- able devices for diabetes: scoping review. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 24(8):e36010, 2022.

Ansari, A. F., Stella, L., Turkmen, C., Zhang, X., Mercado, P., Shen, H., Shchur, O., Rangapuram, S. S., Arango, S. P., Kapoor, S., et al. Chronos: Learning the language of time series. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07815, 2024.

Apple. Estimating sleep stages from Apple watch. link,

September 2023.

Assran, M., Duval, Q., Misra, I., Bojanowski, P., Vincent, P., Rabbat, M., LeCun, Y., and Ballas, N. Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding predictive architecture. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15619– 15629, 2023.

Bianchi, M. T. Sleep devices: wearables and nearables, informational and interventional, consumer and clinical. Metabolism, 84:99–108, 2018.

Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M. S., Bohg, J., Bosse- lut, A., Brunskill, E., et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.

Bycroft, C., Freeman, C., Petkova, D., Band, G., Elliott, L. T., Sharp, K., Motyer, A., Vukcevic, D., Delaneau, O., O’Connell, J., et al. The UK biobank resource with deep phenotyping and genomic data. Nature, 562(7726): 203–209, 2018.

Channa, A., Popescu, N., Skibinska, J., and Burget, R. The rise of wearable devices during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic review. Sensors, 21(17):5787, 2021.

Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., and Hinton, G. A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual rep- resentations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.

Chowdhury, R. R., Li, J., Zhang, X., Hong, D., Gupta, R. K., and Shang, J. Primenet: Pre-training for irregular multi- variate time series. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer- ence on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 7184–7192, 2023.

Dao, T. and Gu, A. Transformers are SSMs: Generalized models and efficient algorithms through structured state space duality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21060, 2024.

Denny, J. C., Rutter, J. L., Goldstein, D. B., Philippakis, A., Smoller, J. W., Jenkins, G., Dishman, E., and The All of Us Research Program Investigators. The “All of Us” Research Program. New England Journal of Medicine, 381(7):668–676, August 2019. ISSN 0028-4793. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsr1809937. URL https://www.nejm. org/doi/10.1056/NEJMsr1809937. Publisher: Massachusetts Medical Society.

Dufter, P., Schmitt, M., and Sch¨utze, H. Position infor- mation in transformers: An overview. Computational Linguistics, 48(3):733–763, 2022.

Fallahpour, A., Alinoori, M., Afkanpour, A., and Krish- nan, A. Ehrmamba: Towards generalizable and scalable foundation models for electronic health records. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14567, 2024.

Garza, A. and Mergenthaler-Canseco, M. Timegpt-1. arXiv

preprint arXiv:2310.03589, 2023.

Gomes, N., Pato, M., Lourenco, A. R., and Datia, N. A survey on wearable sensors for mental health monitoring. Sensors, 23(3):1330, 2023.

Gu, A. and Dao, T. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.

Jeong, H., Oufattole, N., Balagopalan, A., Mcdermott, M., Chandak, P., Ghassemi, M., and Stultz, C. Event-based contrastive learning for medical time series. 2023.

Labach, A., Pokhrel, A., Huang, X. S., Zuberi, S., Yi, S. E., Volkovs, M., Poutanen, T., and Krishnan, R. G. Duett: dual event time transformer for electronic health records. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, 2023.

Liang, A., Jiang, X., Sun, Y., and Lu, C. Bi-mamba4ts: Bidirectional mamba for time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15772, 2024.

Lipton, Z. C., Kale, D., and Wetzel, R. Directly modeling missing data in sequences with RNNs: Improved classi- fication of clinical time series. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pp. 253–270. PMLR, 2016.

10

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

Liu, H., Dai, Z., So, D., and Le, Q. V. Pay attention to mlps. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34: 9204–9215, 2021.

Lyzwinski, L., Elgendi, M., and Menon, C. Innovative approaches to menstruation and fertility tracking using wearable reproductive health technology: systematic re- view. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 26:e45139, 2024.

MacRae, C. A. Apple Heart & Movement Study. Clin- ical trial registration NCT04198194, clinicaltrials.gov, July 2021. URL https://clinicaltrials.gov/ study/NCT04198194. submitted: November 13, 2019.

Merrill, M. A. and Althoff, T. Self-supervised pretraining and transfer learning enable flu and COVID-19 predic- tions in small mobile sensing datasets. In Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, pp. 191–206. PMLR, 2023.

Merrill, M. A., Safranchik, E., Kolbeinsson, A., Gade, P., Ramirez, E., Schmidt, L., Foschini, L., and Althoff, T. Homekit2020: A benchmark for time series classification on a large mobile sensing dataset with laboratory tested ground truth of influenza infections. In Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, 2023.

Mishra, A., Park, J., Shapiro, I., Fisher-Colbrie, T., Baird, D. D., Suharwardy, S., Zhang, S., Jukic, A. M. Z., and Curry, C. L. Trends in sensor-based health metrics dur- ing and after pregnancy: descriptive data from the ap- ple women’s health study. AJOG Global Reports, 4(4): 100388, 2024.

Moshawrab, M., Adda, M., Bouzouane, A., Ibrahim, H., and Raad, A. Smart wearables for the detection of cardio- vascular diseases: a systematic literature review. Sensors, 23(2):828, 2023.

Narayanswamy, G., Liu, X., Ayush, K., Yang, Y., Xu, X., Liao, S., Garrison, J., Tailor, S., Sunshine, J., Liu, Y., et al. Scaling wearable foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13638, 2024.

Nestor, B., Hunter, J., Kainkaryam, R., Drysdale, E., Inglis, J. B., Shapiro, A., Nagaraj, S., Ghassemi, M., Foschini, L., and Goldenberg, A. Machine learning COVID-19 detection from wearables. The Lancet Digital Health, 5 (4):e182–e184, 2023.

Ramachandran, P., Zoph, B., and Le, Q. V. Swish: a self-gated activation function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05941, 7(1):5, 2017.

Rasul, K., Ashok, A., Williams, A. R., Khorasani, A., Adamopoulos, G., Bhagwatkar, R., Biloš, M., Ghonia, H., Hassen, N. V., Schneider, A., et al. Lag-llama: Towards foundation models for time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08278, 2023.

Ren, H., Wang, J., Zhao, W. X., and Wu, N. Rapt: Pre- training of time-aware transformer for learning robust healthcare representation. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2021.

Sablayrolles, A., Douze, M., Schmid, C., and J´egou, H. Spreading vectors for similarity search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03198, 2018.

Shapiro, I., Stein, J., MacRae, C., and O’Reilly, M. Pulse oximetry values from 33,080 participants in the Apple Heart & Movement Study. npj Digital Medicine, 6 (1):1–13, July 2023. ISSN 2398-6352. doi: 10.1038/ s41746-023-00851-6. URL https://www.nature. com/articles/s41746-023-00851-6. Num- ber: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

Shaw, P., Uszkoreit, J., and Vaswani, A. Self-attention with relative position representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02155, 2018.

Shukla, S. N. and Marlin, B. Multi-time attention networks for irregularly sampled time series. In International Con- ference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Su, J., Ahmed, M., Lu, Y., Pan, S., Bo, W., and Liu, Y. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.

Tipirneni, S. and Reddy, C. K. Self-supervised transformer for sparse and irregularly sampled multivariate clinical time-series. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), 16(6):1–17, 2022.

Truslow, J., Spillane, A., Lin, H., Cyr, K., Ullal, A., Arnold, E., Huang, R., Rhodes, L., Block, J., Stark, J., Kretlow, J., Beatty, A. L., Werdich, A., Bankar, D., Bianchi, M., Shapiro, I., Villalpando, J., Ravin- dran, S., Mance, I., Phillips, A., Earl, J., Deo, R. C., Desai, S. A., and MacRae, C. A. Understanding ac- tivity and physiology at scale: The Apple Heart & Movement Study. npj Digital Medicine, 7(1):1–11, September 2024. ISSN 2398-6352. doi: 10.1038/ s41746-024-01187-5. URL https://www.nature. com/articles/s41746-024-01187-5. Pub- lisher: Nature Publishing Group.

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Atten- tion is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.

11

Beyond Sensor Data: Foundation Models of Behavioral Data from Wearables Improve Health Predictions

Wang, S., McDermott, M. B., Chauhan, G., Ghassemi, M., Hughes, M. C., and Naumann, T. Mimic-extract: A data extraction, preprocessing, and representation pipeline for mimic-iii. In Proceedings of the ACM conference on health, inference, and learning, pp. 222–235, 2020.

Wang, Z., Kong, F., Feng, S., Wang, M., Zhao, H., Wang, D., and Zhang, Y. Is mamba effective for time series forecasting? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11144, 2024.

Woo, G., Liu, C., Kumar, A., Xiong, C., Savarese, S., and Sahoo, D. Unified training of universal time series fore- casting transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02592, 2024.

Wornow, M., Bedi, S., Hernandez, M. A. F., Steinberg, E., Fries, J. A., R´e, C., Koyejo, S., and Shah, N. H. Context clues: Evaluating long context models for clinical predic- tion tasks on EHRs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16178, 2024.

Xu, M. A., Narain, J., Darnell, G., Hallgrimsson, H., Jeong, H., Forde, D., Fineman, R., Raghuram, K. J., Rehg, J. M., and Ren, S. Relcon: Relative contrastive learning for a motion foundation model for wearable data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18822, 2024.

Xu, Y., Biswal, S., Deshpande, S. R., Maher, K. O., and Sun, J. Raim: Recurrent attentive and intensive model of multimodal patient monitoring data. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 2565–2573, 2018.

Yuan, H., Chan, S., Creagh, A. P., Tong, C., Acquah, A., Clifton, D. A., and Doherty, A. Self-supervised learning for human activity recognition using 700,000 person-days of wearable data. npj Digital Medicine, 7(1):91, 2024.

Zerveas, G., Jayaraman, S., Patel, D., Bhamidipaty, A., and Eickhoff, C. A transformer-based framework for multi- variate time series representation learning. In Proceed- ings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 2114–2124, 2021.

Zhang, B. and Sennrich, R. Root mean square layer nor- malization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Zhang, J., Zheng, S., Cao, W., Bian, J., and Li, J. Warp- former: A multi-scale modeling approach for irregular cli