Connecting minds and machines: an interview with Miguel Nicolelis on brain–machine interfaces

INTERVIEW — National Science Review 13: nwag273, 2026. https://doi.org/10.1093/nsr/nwag273. Advance access publication 12 May 2026. INFORMATION SCIENCE. Special Topic: Brain-Computer Intelligence.

Connecting minds and machines: an interview with Miguel Nicolelis on brain–machine interfaces. Yiwen Wang.

Brain–machine interfaces (BMIs) are a groundbreaking innovation in neuroscience and biomedical engineering, facilitating direct communication between the neural activities of the brain and external devices. These interfaces have the potential to fundamentally transform rehabilitation methods, assistive technologies, and cognitive enhancement. By enabling large-scale recordings of neural populations, researchers can decode how groups of neurons function together, utilizing this information to control devices such as prosthetic limbs and robotic arms. This interview highlights the pioneering research of Dr. Miguel Nicolelis, who has made substantial contributions to understanding how the brains of freely behaving animals encode sensory and motor information. His use of chronic, multisite, multi-electrode recordings allows for real-time control of neuroprosthetic devices through neural signals.

Dr. Miguel Nicolelis, M.D., Ph.D., is the Emeritus Professor of Neuroscience at Duke University. Founder of Duke's Center for Neuroengineering and the Edmond and Lily Safra International Institute for Neuroscience of Natal.

NSR: What makes you define this field?
Nicolelis: There was no field when I started. John Chapin and I were creating this field on our own. From 1989 to 1994, we developed new techniques to record from multiple neurons simultaneously in behaving animals. I stayed in John's lab until 1994, publishing methods papers in Nature and PNAS, working in rats. Then at Duke I started experiments on monkeys. In 1998, I published a paper with Jon Kaas and John Chapin showing we could record at least 100 neurons from multiple cortical areas in Owl monkeys. We had read Eberhard Fetz's 1960s neurofeedback papers. In 1999 we published the first paper on using brain activity to control robotic arms in Nature Neuroscience using rats. In 2000, I wrote an invited opinion piece in Nature coining the term 'brain–machine interface (BMI)'. That same year we published the first BMI paper using Owl monkeys. In 2002 Scientific American published our clinical applications paper. In 2003 we published the first paper using rhesus monkeys and in 2004 the first paper in humans. We created the BMI field as we know it today.

NSR: Distinction between brain–computer interfaces and brain–machine interfaces?
Nicolelis: Brain–machine interface is the more generic term because you can connect a brain to a robotic arm, virtual tool, or mechanical devices. A brain–computer interface is a subcategory of brain–machine interfaces.

NSR: Did you have great expectations?
Nicolelis: In 2002 we realized there would be two approaches: basic science (hundreds of papers, including brainets—shared BMIs involving 2+ subjects—and brain-to-brain interfaces), and clinical applications. In the US it was difficult in the early 2000s. So I created the Walk Again Project and came to Brazil for clinical testing. Our first demonstration was during the opening ceremony of the FIFA Football World Cup in 2014.

NSR: Does BMI address never-solved questions?
Nicolelis: John Chapin thought BMI would be the salvation of systems neuroscience. BMI research brought forward the theory of neuronal ensembles pioneered by Donald Hebb in 1949 (The Organization of Behavior). In 1995, Chapin and I published a Science paper recording all relays of the entire somatosensory pathway in behaving rats—from trigeminal ganglion, to trigeminal brainstem nuclei, to thalamus, to somatosensory cortex in the same animal. This was a watershed study.

NSR: Role of engineering, real-time decoding?
Nicolelis: In the 1990s we published a paper using an artificial neural network to analyze multi-electrode recordings. We had to record 100 neurons simultaneously in about a third of a second, decode motor intention, convert analog signals to digital commands, send to a robotic arm, while the animal received visual and tactile feedback. In our rhesus monkey paper we found motor signals all over the frontal-parietal circuit—not only M1 or premotor, but S1 and posterior parietal cortex. Cortex seems to work as a whole.

Nicolelis: I started building a completely different theory—not consistent with classical Brodmann view—that the brain computes in an analog fashion and as a whole. We concluded the main functional attributes of the human brain are noncomputable in digital logic. The animal's cortex was assimilating the robotic arm as an extension of body representation. That inspired me to create an exoskeleton ten years later to help paraplegics regain mobility using a BMI.

NSR: Neuroplasticity and body representation?
Nicolelis: Systems-level plasticity in adult animals was first described by Jon Kaas and Michael Merzenich in 1983. In 2003 we published the first paper describing tool assimilation, ten years before we built the exoskeleton. In our 2002 Scientific American paper we said a robotic vest could be controlled directly by the brain. When we worked with paraplegic patients a decade later, we induced a phantom limb sensation, confirming cortical and subcortical plasticity—key to partial clinical recovery. In a December preprint with Xuanwu Hospital in Beijing, some patients walked with a metal walker without body support.

NSR: Systematically manipulating neuroplasticity for rehab?
Nicolelis: The noninvasive BMI option works to provide functional recovery, movement, and bladder control. We are testing NIRS (infrared spectroscopy). Our noninvasive Walk Again neurorehab protocol allows patients to control an avatar or robotic exoskeleton. In Brazil a 28-month trial: all seven patients upgraded from ASIA A to ASIA C (partial paraplegia). In China at Xuanwu Hospital a nine-month trial: 50% of chronic ASIA A complete paraplegic patients upgraded to ASIA C. One patient with 20 years of chronic paraplegia walked with a lower leg orthosis using a metal walker.

NSR: Scenarios for invasive BMIs?
Nicolelis: I created the acronym SEAS. S = safety (invasive procedures only when no other options; a major ethical issue). E = efficacy (must work). A = affordability. Biocompatibility of cortical implants is not fully resolved; our Nature Methods 2014 paper showed cortical implants in monkeys lasted eight years. S = scalability (an estimated 3.4 billion people worldwide suffer from brain disorders). Invasive techniques still need substantial research for longevity and should be reserved for cases where noninvasive options are ineffective.

NSR: Next big question with invasive BMIs?
Nicolelis: You can sample from thousands of cortical and subcortical areas in animals performing sophisticated tasks, including social groups. Since 2014 (Nature Methods) we use wireless recordings for social dynamics in primate colonies. The key is social neuroscience—studying groups of animals interacting in real time. We did that with three monkeys (2018 shared brain control BMI paper). In closed, bonded social groups there is a high degree of cortical synchrony among individuals. That's the foundation of the brainet concept. I'm writing a book on how brainet could underlie animal group formation from bacteria and insects to humans. Language may be the main medium for human synchronization; animals use vocalizations, pheromones, eye contact.

NSR: Real-time dynamic interactions vs prerecorded data?
Nicolelis: The main contribution of our early work was recording and analyzing multiple neurons simultaneously in real time. BMI brought the capability to scale the number of neurons recorded, reaching ~1860 neurons simultaneously by 2014. Today other techniques record 2-3 orders of magnitude more. We conducted decoding in real time for several animals at the same time.

NSR: Advice for young researchers?
Nicolelis: Our first human study (11 patients) was published in Neurosurgery. The paper was rejected in Science because a reviewer said there was no future for brain–machine interfaces. The rhesus monkey paper (almost 3000 citations) was rejected by Nature and Science but published in one of the first issues of PLOS Biology. Don't get discouraged if big journals reject new ideas. If you believe in what you're doing, ignore the reviewers and keep pushing forward.

Yiwen Wang is an Associate Professor at Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.

© The Author(s) 2026. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of China Science Publishing & Media Ltd. Open Access, Creative Commons Attribution License.
