Individual deviations from normative electroencephalographic connectivity predict antidepressant response 

Research paper Individual deviations from normative electroencephalographic connectivity predict antidepressant response

Xiaoyu Tong a, Hua Xie b,c, Wei Wu d, Corey J. Keller e,f, Gregory A. Fonzo g, Matthieu Chidharom h, Nancy B. Carlisle h, Amit Etkin d, Yu Zhang a,i,\*

a Department of Bioengineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA b Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA c George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA d Alto Neuroscience, Inc., Los Altos, CA, USA e Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, CA, USA f Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Healthcare System, Sierra Pacific Mental Illness, Research, Education, and Clinical Center (MIRECC), Palo Alto, CA, USA g Center for Psychedelic Research and Therapy, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Dell Medical School, The University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA h Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA i Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords: EEG Functional connectivity Individual deviation Major depressive disorder Antidepressant Treatment outcome

A B S T R A C T

Background: Antidepressant medications yield unsatisfactory treatment outcomes in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) with modest advantages over the placebo, partly due to the elusive mechanisms of antidepressant responses and unexplained heterogeneity in patient's response to treatment. Here we develop a novel normative modeling framework to quantify individual deviations in psychopathological dimensions that offers a promising avenue for the personalized treatment for psychiatric disorders. Methods: We built a normative model with resting-state electroencephalography (EEG) connectivity data from healthy controls of three independent cohorts. We characterized the individual deviation of MDD patients from the healthy norms, based on which we trained sparse predictive models for treatment responses of MDD patients (102 sertraline-medicated and 119 placebo-medicated). Hamilton depression rating scale (HAMD-17) was assessed at both baseline and after the eight-week antidepressant treatment. Results: We successfully predicted treatment outcomes for patients receiving sertraline (r = 0.43, p \< 0.001) and placebo (r = 0.33, p \< 0.001). We also showed that the normative modeling framework successfully distin- guished subclinical and diagnostic variabilities among subjects. From the predictive models, we identified key connectivity signatures in resting-state EEG for antidepressant treatment, suggesting differences in neural circuit involvement between sertraline and placebo responses. Conclusions: Our findings and highly generalizable framework advance the neurobiological understanding in the potential pathways of antidepressant responses, enabling more targeted and effective personalized MDD treatment. Trial registration: Establishing Moderators and Biosignatures of Antidepressant Response for Clinical Care for Depression (EMBARC), NCT\#01407094.

1\. Introduction

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a prevalent psychiatric disorder with a lifetime prevalence of over 20 %, making it a significant contributor to global ill health and disability (Hasin et al., 2018). However, the neuropathological mechanisms underlying MDD remain a

subject of debate (Albert et al., 2012; Morrissette and Stahl, 2014; Wagstaff et al., 2001; Walker, 2013), impeding the development of effective antidepressants and leading to suboptimal treatment outcomes and reduced quality of life for individuals with MDD. Although numerous medications have been approved for MDD treatment, their efficacy beyond placebo is modest at best, with only a few newly

\* Corresponding author at: Bioengineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA.

E-mail address: yuzi20@lehigh.edu (Y. Zhang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2024.01.177 Received 23 August 2023; Received in revised form 15 January 2024; Accepted 18 January 2024

Available online 27 January 2024 0165-0327/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Affective Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jad

Journal of Affective Disorders 351 (2024) 220–230

approved medications demonstrating equivocal effectiveness (Foun- toulakis and M¨oller, 2011; Fournier et al., 2010; Khin et al., 2011; Kirsch, 2019; Kirsch et al., 2008; Turner et al., 2008). This limited response rate is partly attributed to the heterogeneity among MDD pa- tients, resulting in varied responses to antidepressant treatments (Carter et al., 2012; Cipriani et al., 2018). Additionally, the delayed onset of action of antidepressants, typically taking at least four weeks, means that MDD patients may spend months or even years searching for an effective treatment (Association, 2000) while enduring associated side effects (Levinstein and Samuels, 2014). Therefore, the ability to predict treatment efficacy early on could significantly expedite clinical decision- making processes and improve patient outcomes. Consequently, a crucial step towards enhancing treatment outcomes and quality of life for individuals with MDD is the implementation of precision medicine, which involves utilizing pretreatment measures to quantify individual deviations in psychopathological dimensions, as proposed by the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) framework (Insel et al., 2010).

X. Tong et al.

Fig. 1. Flowchart of antidepressant response prediction based on individual deviations from normative electroencephalographic (EEG) FC (FC) a Normative modeling framework. First, a healthy norm was developed with healthy EEG FC using an autoencoder. Second, patient EEG FC were fed into the autoencoder, generating reconstructed EEG FC for each patient. The subject-level individual deviations from normative EEG FC were then quantified as the reconstruction error (raw FC - reconstructed FC) yielded by the autoencoder. b Distribution of individual deviations. The autoencoder captures common dimensions shared by healthy controls. The reconstruction errors, namely the individual deviations, reflect unseen dimensions in healthy controls. Those unseen dimensions were hypothesized to be associated with diseases, including MDD and other psychopathological dimensions. Thus, the individual deviations amplify the disease dimensions to yield FC features that are more predictive of treatment responses. c Predictive modeling framework. The individual deviations from normative EEG FC were utilized as the input features of the predictive modeling framework. First, correlation analyses were conducted on all individual deviations to identify statistically significant features of antidepressant responses. Second, insignificant features were masked out to reduce the feature dimensionality. Lastly, sparse learning techniques were implemented on selected features to develop cross-validated models and generate individual-level predictions of antidepressant responses. Response-predictive biomarkers were identified as feature weights of FC-based individual deviations.

Journal of Affective Disorders 351 (2024) 220–230

221

In the quest for precision medicine in psychiatric disorders, neuro- imaging techniques have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in identifying neurobiological alterations that can predict disorder di- agnoses (Abi-Dargham and Horga, 2016; Dong et al., 2019; Houenou et al., 2012; Kl¨oppel et al., 2012; Kraguljac et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2018; Woo et al., 2017). However, previous neuroimaging studies have pri- marily focused on group-level differences in brain features between patients and healthy controls, overlooking the heterogeneity within the patient population. Consequently, efforts have been made to identify subtypes within each disorder (Beijers et al., 2019; Chang et al., 2021; Drysdale et al., 2017; Pelin et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021), with the goal of tailoring treatments based on these subtypes to achieve precision medicine. Nevertheless, the translation of these subtype findings into improved clinical practice has been challenging, partially due to the inability to construct a continuous spectrum of psychopathological di- mensions that accounts for heterogeneity within subtypes, as well as the dissociation between identified subtypes and treatment responses (Fava

et al., 1997). To address these challenges, normative modeling has emerged as a promising framework for dissecting patient heterogeneity and conceptualizing psychopathological dimensions by quantifying in- dividual deviations from a healthy norm (Marquand et al., 2019). While several neuroimaging studies have employed normative modeling, particularly in the realm of structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Marquand et al., 2016; Parkes et al., 2021), investigations uti- lizing functional connectivity (FC) features remain relatively unex- plored. Notably, our prior work utilizing resting-state functional MRI (rsfMRI) has demonstrated the potential of FC-based normative modeling in quantifying individual brain dysfunction and parsing neurobiological heterogeneity (Maron-Katz et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2023). Additionally, electroencephalography (EEG), another non-invasive neuroimaging technique, provides a cost-effective and user-friendly alternative to rsfMRI for clinical practice. Recent studies have shown that resting-state EEG (rsEEG) connectivity can facilitate MDD diagnosis (Duan et al., 2020) and reveal MDD subtypes (Zhang et al., 2021). Collectively, these recent research endeavors suggest that FC-based individual deviations hold promise in providing crucial in- formation regarding psychopathological dimensions, thereby paving the way towards precision medicine for MDD.

This study aimed to develop a normative modeling framework based on rsEEG FC to identify clinically translatable pretreatment biomarkers for antidepressant response prediction. To this end, we constructed an EEG FC-based normative modeling framework that quantifies individual deviations in psychopathological dimensions (Fig. 1) using three inde- pendent cohorts. First, employing an autoencoder-based reconstruction model, we established a healthy norm for rsEEG connectivity that quantitatively measures individual deviations of MDD patients in psy- chopathological dimensions. Second, to tailor these individual de- viations to antidepressant responses, we employed a predictive modeling framework that captures treatment response-correlated indi- vidual deviations under supervision, leveraging machine learning techniques known for their promise in precision psychiatry (Chen et al., 2022). Predictive modeling utilizing the quantified FC deviations enabled individual-level prediction of antidepressant responses. Subse- quently, we confirmed the unique advantage of the individual FC deviation-driven signatures by comparing the results with predictions obtained from commonly used clinical measures or raw EEG FC features. We also compared the performance of our autoencoder-based individual deviations with other normative modeling strategies, including prin- cipal component analysis (PCA)-based and regression-based (Rutherford et al., 2022) individual deviations. Furthermore, to investigate whether sertraline and placebo treatment responses involve distinct neural cir- cuits, we compared the importance of individual deviations in rsEEG connectivity across treatment arms and brain networks. Finally, we interpreted the autoencoder-based individual deviations using commonly used clinical measures. The present work aimed to generate translatable models for predicting antidepressant response using a novel and interpretable normative modeling framework, thereby enabling treatment outcome prediction and facilitating the realization of preci- sion psychiatry for individuals with MDD.

2\. Materials and methods

2.1. Participants

Overall, we included healthy controls from three independent co- horts and MDD patients from one clinical cohort with antidepressant treatment response data. We integrated three cohorts of 154 healthy controls to ensure our healthy norms represent inter-cohort variability and improve the generalizability of our findings. We focused antide- pressant response predictive modeling on one cohort of 221 medicated MDD patients (aged 18–65) because of the availability of treatment outcome data. A brief summary of subjects included in our study can be found in Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary methods.

X. Tong et al.

Journal of Affective Disorders 351 (2024) 220–230

222

2.2. Source-space rsEEG FC calculation

For detailed EEG acquisition and quality control, see Supplementary methods. With the Brainstorm toolbox (Tadel et al., 2011), we first implemented source localization using the minimum-norm estimation approach (Hauk, 2004) to convert the channel-space EEG into the source-space signals of 3003 vertices. A three-layer (scalp, skull, and cortical surface) boundary element head model was computed with the OpenMEEG plugin (Gramfort et al., 2010) based on the FreeSurfer average brain template (Fischl, 2012). A total of 3003 dipoles with unconstrained orientations were generated on the cortical surface. The lead-field matrix relating the dipole activities to the EEG was obtained by projecting the standard electrode positions onto the scalp. For each subject, an imaging kernel that maps from the channel space EEG to the source space current density was then estimated by the minimum norm estimation approach with depth weighting and regularization. Principal component analysis was then employed to reduce the three-dimensional estimated source signal at each vertex to the one-dimensional time series of the principal component.

To capture the brain functional architecture, we extracted con- nectomic features by calculating power envelope connectivity (PEC) (Zhang et al., 2021) since it has demonstrated strength in mitigating spurious correlations resulting from volume conduction (Hipp et al., 2012). Hilbert transform was first applied to convert source estimates into analytical time series. The analytical time series of each pair of brain signals were then orthogonalized to remove the zero-phase-lag correlation (Hipp et al., 2012). Afterward, the power envelopes were measured by calculating the square of the orthogonalized analytical signals. A logarithmic transform was subsequently conducted to enhance normality. PEC was then calculated as the Pearson's correlation coefficient between the log-transformed power envelopes of each pair of brain regions. Finally, a Fisher's r-to-z transformation was performed to enhance normality (Hipp et al., 2012; Kabbara et al., 2022). The regional pairwise PEC features were further extracted based on the Schaefer atlas with 100 brain regions (Schaefer et al., 2017). For each pair of regions, connectivity was calculated by averaging PEC values over all possible vertex pairs.

To ensure the individual deviation of each subject was independent of other subjects, the normalization of EEG FC data was conducted on each subject. For each subject, we first performed an inverse hyperbolic tangent transformation on the EEG FC data to better accommodate deviated values of EEG FC. The transformed strengths of 4950 FCs were then z-scored to have a zero mean and unit standard deviation. Notably, this procedure also guaranteed that all the three cohorts had the same FC mean and standard deviation. This normalization strategy endowed the EEG FC of each subject with the independence of other subjects and emphasized the distinguishability between brain regions with high and low FCs.

2.3. Normative modeling of functional connectivity

Above all, to calibrate demographics across the independent cohorts, thus to improve the reliability and prediction performance of normative modeling, we developed healthy norms of 154 young adults (age 18–25), which consist of 8 subjects from the EMBARC cohort, 75 sub- jects from the depression-EEG cohort, and 71 subjects from the LEMON cohort. The age threshold of 25 was chosen because the Depression-EEG cohort only had subjects younger than 22, and the LEMON cohort only recorded subjects' age with a resolution of 5 years. Therefore, including healthy controls with age between 18 and 25 was the best way to match demographics of the three independent cohorts. Healthy norms were derived using three strategies as discussed below.

2.4. Principal component analysis (PCA)-based Modeling

PCA is one of the simplest approach to reconstruct data with lower

dimensionality. Here we established the PCA-based reconstruction error to demonstrate that a linear unsupervised reconstruction might be too simple to capture individual deviation information. Specifically, we applied a PCA on the 4950 EEG FCs of healthy subjects and empirically selected the first 100 principal components (explained \>90 % variance) to reduce dimensionality. The reconstructed FCs were calculated as the matrix product of kept principal components and transposed eigenvec- tors. The reconstruction error, which was subsequently used to develop antidepressant response prediction models, was calculated as the dif- ference between original FCs and reconstructed FCs.

2.5. Regression-based modeling

Afterward, we calculated individual deviations using an existing normative modeling framework. A recent study developed a compre- hensive and user-friendly workflow for realizing normative modeling in precision psychiatry (Rutherford et al., 2022). We employed this stan- dardized framework to derive regression-based individual deviations of rsEEG FCs. Briefly, the framework requires users to pre-select a set of covariates and then regress out those covariates based on regression models for FCs. Specifically, we included age and gender as covariates (they were the only two demographic variables shared by all three in- dependent cohorts) and calculated individual deviations in FCs with reference to the age and gender-based FC prediction, which was trained on healthy subjects and applied on MDD patients. The resulting indi- vidual deviations were then used to develop antidepressant response prediction models, which unfortunately yielded unsatisfactory predic- tion performance. Notably, the unsatisfactory performance of regression-based individual deviations in antidepressant response pre- diction might be due to the lack of common variables that were usable as covariates. It might be also because the regression models were not accurate enough to robustly estimate individual deviations in FCs. But in either case, it demonstrated the approach's over-reliance on pre-selected covariates and regression performance, calling for an unsupervised normative modeling strategy that is more flexible and accommodating.

2.6. Autoencoder-based modeling

The autoencoder has been employed by numerous neuroimaging studies as the normative modeling framework (Kumar and Sotiras, 2021; Pinaya et al., 2019; Pinaya et al., 2021) for its independence of super- vision and high flexibility. The autoencoder we employed for the healthy norm development consists of three layers, including an input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer. The input and output layers have a dimensionality of 4950, which is the total number of FCs with a 100-ROI brain atlas (Schaefer et al., 2017). The hidden layer has a reduced dimensionality to allow the autoencoder to find representative dimensions for the healthy controls (Fig. 1). We empirically selected a dimensionality of 500 for the hidden layer to reduce the dimensionality magnitude while keeping adequate complexity of autoencoders.

The autoencoder training iteratively optimized the parameters for the encoder and the decoder. In practice, we used the MATLAB function “trainAutoencoder” to realize the training process. Specifically, a collection of healthy controls' EEG FC data was fed into the input layer of the autoencoder. A L2-norm constraint was implemented in the autoencoder training to reduce the collinearity between FCs. Addition- ally, both encoder and decoder utilize a sigmoid activation function to introduce nonlinearity. The resultant output layer represented the reconstructed EEG FC for each individual subject. Finally, the difference between the original EEG FC and the reconstructed one, termed recon- struction error, was utilized as the quantification of individual deviation from the healthy norm.

As the individual deviations used for sertraline and placebo response prediction were derived from a healthy norm of young adults, we examined whether the prediction performance was dependent on age. Correlation analyses revealed no correlation between sertraline

X. Tong et al.

Journal of Affective Disorders 351 (2024) 220–230

223

response and age (r = 0.04, p = 0.67, Supplementary Fig. 2a), and ab- solute prediction residuals were also independent of age (EO-alpha: r = − 0.09, p = 0.36; EO-gamma: r = − 0.09, p = 0.37, Supplementary Fig. 2c, d). A further analysis confirmed that the individual deviation dimensions of sertraline response and age were orthogonal (Inner products of age dimension and sertraline response dimension: EO-alpha: − 0.007; EO-gamma: − 0.028), justifying that the normative modeling based on healthy young adults was capable of predicting sertraline re- sponses of elder MDD patients.

Overall, autoencoder-based individual deviation differed from the previous normative modeling frameworks (Marquand et al., 2016; Parkes et al., 2021; Ziegler et al., 2014) in three aspects. First, contrary to that previous framework generated predictions for each of the brain regions and then combine them to a data matrix, our framework pro- cessed all pairs of ROI-ROI level EEG connectivity together and produces the matrix of individual deviations as a single entity, thus taking in- teractions between brain regions into account. Second, our framework essentially quantified individual deviations of patients based on a dis- tance mapping of EEG connectivity relative to healthy controls, hence the individual deviation only relies on actual neuroimaging data without dependence on prediction models. Third, autoencoder-based normative modeling is unsupervised, thus not requiring pre-defined covariates and capable of dissecting dimensions not yet discovered by previous studies. Equipped with these features, our normative modeling framework for rsEEG data held the potential to produce a more translatable, objective, generalizable, and robust quantification of individual deviations in psychopathological dimensions.

2.7. Treatment response prediction

The treatment response prediction was respectively generated for the sertraline and placebo arms, where the treatment outcome was quanti- fied as the pre- minus post-treatment change in HAMD17 score. The general workflow included two steps: feature calculation and predictive modeling. For input features, we compared the performances of raw EEG FCs and normative modeling-quantified individual deviations (Supple- mentary Tables 4, 5). For the predictive modeling, we first applied the connectome-based predictive modeling framework (Shen et al., 2017) to select connectivity features that were significantly correlated with the outcome. Afterward, as individual deviations in many EEG conditions could predict age (Supplementary Table 6), and age showed modest correlation with placebo response (Supplementary Fig. 2), we regressed out age from individual deviation features to ensure that the brain sig- natures we identified were not confounded by age. Finally, LASSO regression (Santosa and Symes, 1986; Tibshirani, 1996) was imple- mented to further reduce the complexity of final models.

2.8. Cross-validation for performance evaluation

The performances of prediction models were then evaluated using 10-fold cross-validation. Specifically, the data to be fitted were randomly divided to ten subsets while each subset contained approxi- mately the same subject numbers. One of ten subsets was iteratively held out as the test set while the remaining nine subsets were the training set, such that each subject had a predicted outcome. For LASSO regression, the sparsity parameter λ was determined using an inner loop of tenfold cross-validation on the training data. To enhance the stability and reli- ability of model performance evaluation, the data were randomized ten times and the median of the resulting ten predicted outcomes was used as the final predicted value of each subject. The prediction performance was then quantified as the Pearson's correlation coefficient and R- squared value between actual and predicted outcomes. The P value was calculated against the two-tailed null hypothesis that the Pearson's correlation coefficient was equal to zero.

2.9. Connectome-based predictive modeling (CPM)

CPM identifies input features that significantly correlate to the pre- diction outcome (Shen et al., 2017), thus reducing the feature dimen- sionality (Dadi et al., 2019; Ren et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Yoo et al., 2018). Specifically, we correlated the HAMD17 score change with each of the input features (EEG FCs/individual deviations) across all MDD patients in the training set using Pearson's correlation. Only the input features with significant correlation (threshold P-value = 0.05) to HAMD17 score change were retained for the subsequent sparse predic- tive modeling. To prevent data leakage issues, the CPM procedure was performed inside each fold of cross-validation.

2.10. Leave-study-site-out analysis

To assess the reliability of biomarker findings, we performed a leave- study-site-out analysis for the normative modeling-based framework for antidepressant response prediction. Specifically, as the EMBARC dataset includes subjects from four study sites, we trained the prediction models using data from three sites and then evaluated the performance on data from the held-out study site. The held-out study site essentially repre- sents an independent dataset for the biomarker findings acquired from the other study sites, hence the significant predictability on held-out study site provides initial evidence on the generalizability of biomarker findings to other datasets.

2.11. Relative importance of FC

To quantify the importance of each FC, we took the absolute values of FC weights in each of the prediction models as both positive and

X. Tong et al.

Fig. 2. Antidepressant response prediction. a Performance of the sertraline response model. The model was trained and 10× ten-fold cross-validated on the subjects in the sertraline arm (n = 102). b Sertraline response model failed to predict placebo response, demonstrating the model's specificity for sertraline response pre- diction. c Top 20 significant functional connections for sertraline response prediction. d Performance of the placebo response model. The model was trained and 10× ten-fold cross-validated on the subjects in the placebo arm (n = 119). e Placebo response model failed to predict sertraline response, demonstrating the model's specificity for placebo response prediction. f Top 20 significant functional connections for placebo response prediction. Here, r-values indicate Pearson's correlation coefficient between actual and predicted antidepressant responses. P-values are calculated based on the two-sided test against the alternative hypothesis of r ∕= 0. Error bars show standard deviation. VN: visual network; SMN: somatomotor network; DAN: dorsal attention network; VAN: ventral attention network; FPCN: frontoparietal control network; DMN: default-mode network.

Journal of Affective Disorders 351 (2024) 220–230

224

negative weights reflected significant contributions. The absolute feature weights showed different magnitudes for sertraline and placebo response prediction models (Wilcoxon's rank-sum test: p = 0.0017), with the distribution not following a normal distribution (Kolmogorov- Smirnov test. Sertraline: p = 1.49 × 10− 80; Placebo: p = 7.40 × 10− 79). Thus, we sorted FCs according to their absolute feature weights in each prediction model and used their order indices as the quantification of FC importance to perform non-parametric statistical tests. To remove FCs with very small feature weights, we only incorporated the top 400 FCs in each prediction model, which were approximately the top 50 % FCs in each prediction model, corresponding to a z-score threshold of 0.25. Specifically, the FC with the largest/smallest absolute feature weight was assigned with the greatest/lowest importance, which was respec- tively 400 and 1. Other FCs were assigned with importance by an increment of 1.

3\. Results

3.1. Individual deviations of FC predict antidepressant responses

We constructed prediction models for antidepressant responses using individual deviations of FC derived from pre-treatment rsEEG data. The models were built separately for each of the eight conditions, defined by frequency bands (theta, alpha, beta, gamma) and eye status (open, closed). Antidepressant responses were quantified as the changes in the 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD17) scores from pre- to post-treatment. Cross-validation analysis revealed that connectivity deviations in the eyes-open-gamma (EO-gamma) condition significantly predicted the response to sertraline treatment (n = 102, r = 0.43, R- squared = 0.15, pFDR = 4.74 × 10–5, Fig. 2a). Importantly, this

prediction outperformed the prediction based on raw EEG FC features (r = 0.17, Fisher's z = 2.03, pone-tailed = 0.021). Furthermore, the perfor- mance of our autoencoder-based individual deviations approach sur- passed that of PCA- and regression-based individual deviations for sertraline response prediction using the same modeling framework (PCA-based: r = 0.15, Fisher's z = 2.17, pone-tailed = 0.015; regression- based: r = 0.20, Fisher's z = 1.85, pone-tailed = 0.032, Supplementary Fig. 3a, b). Leave-study-site-out analysis further confirmed that the sertraline response prediction model exhibited significant predictability for data from held-out study sites (r = 0.30, p = 0.0022, Supplementary Fig. 4a), demonstrating its potential generalizability to independent cohorts. Individual deviations of connectivity in the eyes-open-alpha (EO-alpha) condition were also significantly predictive of sertraline re- sponses (r = 0.33, pFDR = 0.0076, Supplementary Fig. 5). However, individual deviations in other EEG conditions did not show significant predictive power for sertraline responses (Supplementary Table 7). Notably, the best performing prediction model for sertraline (EO-

X. Tong et al.

Fig. 3. Different pathways underlying sertraline and placebo responses. a–b Importance of network-level connections for sertraline and placebo responses. Network- level connections were quantified as the mean of non-zero FCs between a particular pair of brain networks. FCs were classified into two groups: the transmodal FCs across transmodal regions (e.g., DMN and FPCN), and the non-transmodal FCs across the unimodal regions (VN and SMN) and between the unimodal regions and transmodal regions. The regions inside the red lines at the bottom-right show the transmodal FCs. The regions outside the red lines show the non-transmodal FCs. c Predicted sertraline and placebo responses showed no significant correlation, suggesting the independence between predicted sertraline and placebo responses. The predicted antidepressant responses were acquired for all subjects in the EMMARC cohort (n = 221). d Sertraline and placebo responses showed different charac- teristics in FC weights. The feature weights of transmodal FCs were significantly different between sertraline and placebo responses, whereas no significant difference was identified for the features weights of non-transmodal FCs between sertraline and placebo responses. Moreover, non-transmodal FCs showed significantly higher importance to placebo response prediction than transmodal FCs. These comparisons suggested the relatively higher importance of transmodal FCs to the sertraline response and relatively higher importance of non-transmodal FCs to the placebo response, suggesting different levels of brain networks involved in sertraline and placebo responses. To directly compare the feature weights between two different models, absolute feature weights were ordered for each model, such that the order reflected the relative importance for each of the antidepressant responses. The differences in importance across FC groups were then identified by Wilcoxon's rank- sum tests. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Journal of Affective Disorders 351 (2024) 220–230

225

gamma) did not predict placebo response (r = 0.03, p = 0.74, Fig. 2b), indicating its specificity to sertraline response.

For the placebo arm (n = 119), connectivity deviations in the eyes- closed-beta (EC-beta) condition significantly predicted treatment re- sponses (r = 0.33, pFDR = 0.0019, Fig. 2d), outperforming the model based on raw EEG FC features (r = − 0.03, Fisher's z = 2.84, p = 0.002), as well as the PCA- and regression-based individual deviations (PCA- based: r = 0.15, Fisher's z = 1.43, pone-tailed = 0.076; regression-based: r = 0.07, Fisher's z = 2.07, pone-tailed = 0.019, Supplementary Fig. 3c, d). Leave-study-site-out analysis also demonstrated the potential general- izability of placebo response prediction model to independent cohorts (r = 0.22, p = 0.0155, Supplementary Fig. 4b). Similarly, individual de- viations of connectivity in the eyes-closed-theta (EC-theta) band were significantly predictive of placebo response (r = 0.26, pFDR = 0.015), while other EEG conditions did not show significant predictive power (Supplementary Table 8). Importantly, the best placebo-predicting model (EC-beta) failed to predict sertraline response (r = 0.10, p =

0.32, Fig. 2e), highlighting its specificity to placebo response.

We further investigated the important FC that contributed to the prediction of sertraline and placebo responses. The most important connections were identified based on the feature weights derived from the prediction models. For sertraline response (EO-gamma condition), the connections between the precuneus and superior occipital gyrus, postcentral gyrus and inferior temporal gyrus, and precuneus and angular gyrus were found to be the most influential (Fig. 2c). In the case of placebo response (EC-beta condition), the connections between the middle frontal gyrus and calcarine sulcus, orbitofrontal cortex and cal- carine sulcus, and superior temporal gyrus and precuneus emerged as the most important (Fig. 2f). Additionally, we assessed the importance of network-level connections by averaging the feature weights of non-zero functional connections between pairs of brain networks. Interestingly, we observed a significant involvement of visual and somatomotor net- works in placebo response, whereas their involvement in sertraline response was less pronounced (Fig. 3a, b), indicating distinct neural circuits underlying sertraline and placebo responses.

3.2. Sertraline and placebo responses mediated by different hierarchies of brain networks

As both sertraline and placebo response prediction models showed specificity to treatment arms, one intriguing question was whether ser- traline and placebo responses were achieved via different neurobiolog- ical pathways. First, we confirmed the independence between sertraline and placebo responses by performing a correlational analysis on pre- dicted sertraline and placebo responses. Specifically, we acquired pre- dicted antidepressant responses of both sertraline and placebo treatment for all MDD patients — notably, although we could not predict placebo/ sertraline response using sertraline/placebo response predictive models, we could predict hypothetical responses should the patients be assigned to the other arm. Afterward, we correlated the predicted sertraline and placebo responses, which yielded no significant correlation (r = 0.05, p = 0.46, Fig. 3c). Additionally, we found that the treatment-predictive phenotype derived from EEG connectivity deviations for sertraline and placebo responses were orthogonal (inner product = − 5.23 × 10− 4). Together, these results suggested that sertraline and placebo responses were independent and might be via distinct pathways.

Next, we investigated the FC signature that predicted sertraline and placebo responses. Inspired by the theory of so-called brain gradients (Margulies et al., 2016; Mesulam, 1998), which suggested a hierarchy in brain networks, we classified all FCs into two groups: the transmodal FCs across transmodal regions (e.g., default mode network and frontopar- ietal networks), and the non-transmodal FCs across the unimodal re- gions (visual and somatomotor networks) and between the unimodal and transmodal regions. Wilcoxon's rank-sum tests were performed to identify significant differences of FC importance across treatment arms and the two FC groups (non-transmodal vs. transmodal) (Fig. 3d). As results, non-transmodal FCs showed significantly higher importance than transmodal FCs for predicting placebo response (p = 0.009), and transmodal FCs showed significantly higher importance for predicting sertraline response than placebo response (p = 0.035). These results indicated that placebo response relied heavier on non-transmodal FCs, whereas sertraline response might rely heavier on transmodal FCs, suggesting that placebo response was via more superficial pathways, echoing with the findings that placebo response tends to have earlier onset yet is more prone to relapse and recurrence (Rothschild and Quitkin, 1992; Sonawalla and Rosenbaum, 2022; Stewart et al., 1998).

3.3. Treatment-predictive phenotypes provide supplementary information to commonly-used clinical measures

To assess the practical utility of neuroimaging-based prediction models, we compared them with clinical measure-based prediction models using lower-cost measures such as demographic variables,

X. Tong et al.

Journal of Affective Disorders 351 (2024) 220–230

226

clinical scores, and historical factors. We incorporated totally 134 item- level scores in State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (Spielberger, 1983), Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (Bernstein et al., 1998; Bernstein et al., 2003), Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (Rush et al., 2003), Mood and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire (Clark and Watson, 1991), and age and education years. With the same predictive modeling framework (LASSO regression), these item-level scores yielded no to modest predictability of treatment responses (sertraline response: r = 0.22, p = 0.018; placebo response: r = 0.03, p = 0.75). Importantly, the rsEEG-based treatment-predictive phenotypes outperformed the clinical measure-based models (sertraline response: Fisher's z = 1.84, p = 0.033; placebo response: Fisher's z = 2.38, p = 0.009), confirming the advantage of utilizing rsEEG-based phenotypes in predicting antide- pressant responses over lower-cost measures.

3.4. Normative modeling distinguishes subclinical and diagnostic variabilities

Lastly, as autoencoders reduce feature dimensionality in an unsu- pervised way, we tested whether indeed the reconstructed rsEEG FC captured the variability in healthy controls and the reconstruction error reflected deviations in psychopathological dimensions. To this end, we first compared the distributions of individual deviations for healthy controls and patient groups. To ensure a fair comparison, we evaluated the individual deviations of healthy controls with cross-validation instead of the subjects used for normative modeling training. Encour- agingly, the results revealed that MDD patients were associated with significantly greater individual deviations than healthy controls for all EEG conditions (Supplementary Fig. 6), confirming that the normative model captured general variability in healthy controls.

Subsequently, we further examined whether the individual de- viations observed in MDD patients primarily associated to psychopath- ological dimensions. To this end, we correlated 9 clinical measures (five sub-scales of Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (Bernstein et al., 1998; Bernstein et al., 2003): emotional abuse, emotional neglect, physical abuse, physical neglect, sexual abuse; total evaluation score of Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (QIDS) (Rush et al., 2003); tripartite scales of Mood and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire (de Beurs et al., 2007; Clark and Watson, 1991): general distress, anhedonic depression, anxious arousal) with either reconstructed rsEEG FC or in- dividual deviations of each FC (as elucidated by EO-gamma condition). We compared whether each clinical measure had stronger correlation with reconstructed FCs or individual deviations using paired Wilcoxon's rank-sum tests, with the absolute correlation coefficients between a particular clinical measure and each FC served as data points (Table 1). To establish the ground truth of whether a clinical measure reflected the variability shared across both healthy controls and patients or the variability specific to patients, we categorized the clinical measures as subclinical or diagnostic depending on whether they significantly distinguish patients from healthy controls (Table 1). Although all clin- ical measures showed significant distinction between healthy subjects and MDD patients at the significance level of 0.05, two of them (history of physical abuse and sexual abuse) showed a significance level much higher than others (p \> 0.0001), thus were categorized as subclinical measures. The other five clinical measures were categorized as diag- nostic measures. Interestingly, both subclinical measures showed stronger correlation with reconstructed FCs than individual deviations. Meanwhile, 5 of the 7 diagnostic measures (except the history of emotional abuse and score of anxious arousal) showed stronger corre- lation with individual deviations than reconstructed FCs. This result suggested that the reconstruction error derived from the autoencoder model indeed distinguished subclinical and diagnostic variabilities, thus verifying the hypothesis that the reconstruction error from normative modeling captures individual deviations in psychopathological dimensions.

4\. Discussion

In this study, we developed prediction models for antidepressant responses based on individual deviations from normative rsEEG FC. The models demonstrated promising performance for both sertraline and placebo responses, indicating the potential generalizability of this normative modeling-based prediction framework to other treatment responses. Notably, our models outperformed predictions generated by rsEEG FC and individual deviations derived from other existing normative modeling strategies (Rutherford et al., 2022). By analyzing the prediction models, we identified distinct connectivity signatures associated with sertraline and placebo responses, suggesting differences in the neural circuits involved in each treatment. These findings high- light the value of individual deviations as supplementary information to commonly-used clinical measures, such as depression, anxiety, and childhood history questionnaires, thereby enhancing treatment outcome prediction. Furthermore, we interpreted the individual deviations generated by the autoencoder-based modeling using established clinical measures, confirming their ability to distinguish subclinical and diag- nostic variabilities among subjects.

Recent studies have aimed to identify neurobiological biomarkers for antidepressant responses using pretreatment EEG connectivity (Pizzagalli et al., 2018; Rolle et al., 2020; Whitton et al., 2019). In their reports, connectivity in alpha and gamma bands provided essential information to both antidepressant and placebo responses, among them the parietal re- gions were the most important (Rolle et al., 2020). Our prediction models also revealed alpha and gamma bands as the most significant conditions for sertraline response, whereas the beta band was the most informative condition for placebo response. Notably, the precuneus region, a func- tional core of the default-mode network (Utevsky et al., 2014), emerged as a key contributor to sertraline response. Previous studies have associated abnormal activities in the precuneus with low self-esteem (Cheng et al., 2018), recurrence after treatment (Liu et al., 2017), incidence (Lai, 2018), suicide risk (Schreiner et al., 2019), and symptom severity (Peng et al., 2015). Our findings provide further evidence supporting the significance of the precuneus as an indicator for depression dimensions and validate the alignment of our study with previous neuroscience research.

Table 1 Individual deviation distinguishes subclinical and diagnostic variabilities.

Measure Correlation between clinical measures and FC feature/diagnosis

Absolute correlation difference between reconstructed FC and individual deviation

Measure difference between healthy subjects and MDD patients

z-Value p-Value z-Value p-Value

CTQ Emotional abuse ¡6.74 1.58 £ 10¡11 7.49 6.66 × 10− 14 Emotional neglect 6.44 1.19 × 10− 10 6.94 3.83 × 10− 12 Physical abuse ¡5.65 1.65 £ 10¡8 2.68 0.0075 Physical neglect 3.26 0.0011 6.17 6.67 × 10− 10 Sexual abuse ¡12.99 1.49 £ 10¡38 3.68 0.0002 QIDS Total score 12.15 5.74 × 10− 34 10.13 3.94 × 10− 24 MASQ General distress 10.95 6.56 × 10− 28 9.87 5.51 × 10− 23 Anhedonic depression 18.55 8.57 × 10− 77 9.53 1.63 × 10− 21 Anxious arousal ¡8.78 1.69 £ 10¡18 8.74 2.30 × 10− 18

The clinical measures used for interpreting autoencoder-based individual deviations include scores from Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ), Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (QIDS) and Mood and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire (MASQ). For absolute correlation difference between reconstructed FC and in- dividual deviation, z-values are calculated by paired Wilcoxon's rank-sum test for the absolute correlation coefficients between each clinical measure and either reconstructed FCs or individual deviations in FCs. Negative values indicate stronger correlations with reconstructed FCs than individual deviations, whereas positive values indicate stronger correlations with individual deviations than reconstructed FCs. Positive values hypothetically correspond to the variability in psychopath- ological dimensions (because individual deviations are supposed to capture it). For measure difference between healthy subjects and MDD patients, z-values are calculated by unpaired Wilcoxon's rank-sum test for the measure difference between diagnosis groups. We defined clinical measures p \> 0.0001 as subclinical, while measures with p-values smaller than 0.0001 as diagnostic. Both subclinical measures, showed stronger correlations with reconstructed FCs than individual deviations, while five of the seven diagnostic measures except (emotional abuse history and anxious arousal) showed stronger correlations with individual deviations than reconstructed FCs, suggesting the healthy norm derived from the autoencoder model indeed distinguished subclinical and diagnostic variabilities, which in turn validated the hypothesis that the reconstruction error from normative modeling captures individual deviations in psychopathological dimensions. p-Values are uncorrected. The bolded values indicate subclinical variability (the variable correlated with reconstructed FC stronger than individual deviation, or the difference between healthy subjects and MDD patients is modest (p \> 0.0001).

X. Tong et al.

Journal of Affective Disorders 351 (2024) 220–230

227

As for placebo response, we found the calcarine sulcus is of particular importance, where the primary visual cortex is concentrated (Ram- achandran, 2002), aligning with previous studies that placebo treatment may induce alterations in primary visual cortex (Schienle et al., 2014a; Schienle et al., 2014b). Moreover, connections within the limbic network were highly involved in placebo response, mirroring neuro- imaging biomarkers for psychotherapy (Linden, 2006). These findings suggest that placebo treatment may operate through mechanisms similar to psychotherapy, as patients perceive stimuli from clinicians and anticipate improvement from the administered medications.

Notably, in our prediction models, it is the deviations in FC from the healthy norm that contribute to the antidepressant response prediction. Raw EEG FC and individual deviations from normative EEG FC represent different aspects: raw EEG FC describes the coupling between brain re- gions, whereas individual deviations in EEG FC reflect deviations from healthy conditions specific to psychopathological dimensions. Changes in EEG FC may not lead to alterations in individual deviations unless they occur within the relevant psychopathological dimensions. There- fore, individual deviations eliminate variance unrelated to psychopa- thology and conceptually capture the psychopathological dimensions of each individual's FC. The significant feature weights in our models indicate that the individual deviations from normative connectivity in identified connections are crucial for predicting treatment responses. Consequently, the neurobiological biomarkers identified through normative modeling offer unique and supplementary information to previous studies on treatment response biomarkers.

Debates have existed for long about how antidepressant medications take effect on MDD patients (Albert et al., 2012; Walker, 2013), as well as the essence of placebo effect and response (Kirsch, 2019). Our pre- diction models provided novel insights into their response pathways from a FC perspective. Out results indicate that non-transmodal FCs contribute more to the placebo response than transmodal FCs whereas transmodal FCs contribute more to the sertraline response than placebo response. These comparisons suggest that the relatively greater effects of sertraline may be attributed to its higher level of modulation in trans- modal regions compared to placebo's impact on unimodal regions. This finding may also explain the modest difference in response between

sertraline and placebo, as both treatments induce alterations in brain connectivity, albeit in different aspects. Considering that the clinical scales used to measure MDD severity capture the overall neural pathway involving connections in both unimodal and transmodal regions, the overall outcomes of sertraline and placebo treatments may be similar while underlying psychopathological alterations are significantly different. In other words, sertraline and placebo may achieve compa- rable outcomes through distinct neural circuits, which aligns with our simulation analysis that suggests sertraline and placebo response may be independent.

Although our results were preliminarily verified with aforemen- tioned analyses, replication studies with additional independent cohorts are important to confirm our findings of rsEEG connectivity-based in- dividual deviations and predictive modeling for sertraline and placebo responses. Additionally, future work with larger sample size is war- ranted to explore the potential overlapping between healthy controls and patients. Future studies are also needed to validate the generaliz- ability of our proposed framework to other antidepressants, psycho- therapy, neurostimulation therapy, as well as these treatment strategies for other psychiatric disorders. Furthermore, as the original protocol of EMBARC study (Trivedi et al., 2016) did not collect neuroimaging data at the end of treatment, we were unable to confirm the brain connec- tivity alterations mediated by the medications. Therefore, future studies are required to confirm the differences in involved neural circuits be- tween sertraline and placebo responses.

In summary, we developed a novel EEG-based framework that combines normative connectivity modeling and predictive modeling to identify biomarkers of individual antidepressant responses, which yiel- ded promising prediction performance and specificity to treatment arms. Specifically, we quantified individual deviations from the estab- lished normative EEG connectivity, which provide supplementary in- formation to existing commonly-used clinical measures. Importantly, the constructed individual deviations were highly interpretable as they showed capability of distinguishing subclinical and diagnostic vari- abilities across healthy controls and MDD patients. We also identified significant functional connections contributing to antidepressant re- sponses, which showed distinct patterns of sertraline and placebo re- sponses, suggesting distinguishable mechanisms between these two treatments. Together, our work expands the knowledge about the response pathways of antidepressant medications, provides a new avenue towards precision medicine and higher treatment outcomes of MDD, and conceptualizes a highly generalizable framework that may be adapted to studies into other types of antidepressant treatments and a broad range of psychiatric disorders.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Xiaoyu Tong: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis. Hua Xie: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation, Formal analysis. Wei Wu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Corey J. Keller: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Gregory A. Fonzo: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Matthieu Chidharom: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Nancy B. Carlisle: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Amit Etkin: Writing – re- view & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Yu Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

G.A.F. received monetary compensation for consulting work for SynapseBio AI and owns equity in Alto Neuroscience. W.W. and A.E.

X. Tong et al.

Journal of Affective Disorders 351 (2024) 220–230

228

report salary and equity from Alto Neuroscience. A.E. additionally holds equity in Akili Interactive and Mindstrong Health. The remaining au- thors declare no competing interests.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by NIH grant nos. R01MH129694, R21MH130956, R21AG080425, Alzheimer's Association Grant (AARG- 22-972541), and Lehigh University FIG (FIGAWD35), CORE, and Accelerator grants. Portions of this research were conducted on Lehigh University's Research Computing infrastructure partially supported by NSF Award 2019035. G.A.F. was also supported by philanthropic funding and NIH grant nos. K23MH114023 and R01MH125886, and grants from the One Mind - Baszucki Brain Research Fund, the SEAL Future Foundation, and the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation. A. E. was supported by NIH grant nos. DP1MH116506 and R44MH123373.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jad.2024.01.177.

References

Abi-Dargham, A., Horga, G., 2016. The search for imaging biomarkers in psychiatric

disorders. Nat. Med. 22 (11), 1248–1255. Albert, P.R., Benkelfat, C., Descarries, L., 2012. The Neurobiology of

Depression—Revisiting the Serotonin Hypothesis. I. Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms, vol. 367. The Royal Society, pp. 2378–2381. Association, A. P, 2000. Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with major

depressive disorder (revision). Am. J. Psychiatry 157, 1–45. Beijers, L., Wardenaar, K.J., van Loo, H.M., Schoevers, R.A., 2019. Data-driven biological

subtypes of depression: systematic review of biological approaches to depression subtyping. Mol. Psychiatry 24 (6), 888–900. Bernstein, D.P., Fink, L., Handelsman, L., Foote, J., 1998. Childhood trauma

questionnaire. In: Assessment of Family Violence: A Handbook for Researchers and Practitioners. Bernstein, D.P., Stein, J.A., Newcomb, M.D., Walker, E., Pogge, D., Ahluvalia, T.,

Stokes, J., Handelsman, L., Medrano, M., Desmond, D., 2003. Development and validation of a brief screening version of the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire. Child Abuse Negl. 27 (2), 169–190. Carter, G.C., Cantrell, R.A., Zarotsky, V., Haynes, V.S., Phillips, G., Alatorre, C.I.,

Goetz, I., Paczkowski, R., Marangell, L.B., 2012. Comprehensive review of factors implicated in the heterogeneity of response in depression. Depress. Anxiety 29 (4), 340–354. Chang, M., Womer, F.Y., Gong, X., Chen, X., Tang, L., Feng, R., Dong, S., Duan, J.,

Chen, Y., Zhang, R., 2021. Identifying and validating subtypes within major psychiatric disorders based on frontal–posterior functional imbalance via deep learning. Mol. Psychiatry 26 (7), 2991–3002. Chen, Z.S., Galatzer-Levy, I.R., Bigio, B., Nasca, C., Zhang, Y., 2022. Modern views of machine learning for precision psychiatry, arXiv preprint. arXiv:2204.01607. Cheng, W., Rolls, E.T., Qiu, J., Yang, D., Ruan, H., Wei, D., Zhao, L., Meng, J., Xie, P.,

Feng, J., 2018. Functional connectivity of the precuneus in unmedicated patients with depression. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging 3 (12), 1040–1049. Cipriani, A., Furukawa, T.A., Salanti, G., Chaimani, A., Atkinson, L.Z., Ogawa, Y.,

Leucht, S., Ruhe, H.G., Turner, E.H., Higgins, J.P., 2018. Comparative efficacy and acceptability of 21 antidepressant drugs for the acute treatment of adults with major depressive disorder: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Focus 16 (4), 420–429. Clark, L.A., Watson, D., 1991. Mood and anxiety symptom questionnaire. J. Abnorm.

Psychol. 100 (3), 316–336. Dadi, K., Rahim, M., Abraham, A., Chyzhyk, D., Milham, M., Thirion, B., Varoquaux, G.,

Initiative, A. s. D. N, 2019. Benchmarking functional connectome-based predictive models for resting-state fMRI. Neuroimage 192, 115–134. de Beurs, E., den Hollander-Gijsman, M.E., Helmich, S., Zitman, F.G., 2007. The tripartite model for assessing symptoms of anxiety and depression: psychometrics of the Dutch version of the mood and anxiety symptoms questionnaire. Behav. Res. Ther. 45 (7), 1609–1617. Dong, D., Ming, Q., Zhong, X., Pu, W., Zhang, X., Jiang, Y., Gao, Y., Sun, X., Wang, X., Yao, S., 2019. State-independent alterations of intrinsic brain network in current and remitted depression. Prog. Neuro-Psychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 89, 475–480. Drysdale, A.T., Grosenick, L., Downar, J., Dunlop, K., Mansouri, F., Meng, Y., Fetcho, R.

N., Zebley, B., Oathes, D.J., Etkin, A., 2017. Resting-state connectivity biomarkers define neurophysiological subtypes of depression. Nat. Med. 23 (1), 28–38. Duan, L., Duan, H., Qiao, Y., Sha, S., Qi, S., Zhang, X., Huang, J., Huang, X., Wang, C., 2020. Machine learning approaches for MDD detection and emotion decoding using EEG signals. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 14, 284.

Fava, M., Uebelacker, L.A., Alpert, J.E., Nierenberg, A.A., Pava, J.A., Rosenbaum, J.F.,

1997\. Major depressive subtypes and treatment response. Biol. Psychiatry 42 (7), 568–576. Fischl, B., 2012. FreeSurfer. Neuroimage 62 (2), 774–781. Fountoulakis, K.N., M¨oller, H.-J., 2011. Efficacy of antidepressants: a re-analysis and re-

interpretation of the Ki