bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

The Evolving Landscape of Neuroscience
Mario Senden1,2*
Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht University,
P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands

1

Maastricht Brain Imaging Centre, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht University, P.O.
Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands

2

* Correspondence: mario.senden@maastrichtuniversity.nl

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Neuroscience emerged as a distinct academic discipline during the 20th century and has undergone
rapid expansion since then. However, a comprehensive analysis of its evolving landscape remains
lacking. The present study provides a large-scale, data-driven, mapping of neuroscience research.
Leveraging large language models and clustering techniques to analyze 461,316 articles published
between 1999 and 2023, this study reveals the field's structural organization and highlights dominant
themes. Citation network analysis uncovers a surprisingly integrated picture and key intellectual hubs
that shape the broader research landscape. An analysis of how research clusters align with pre-defined
dimensions demonstrates a strong experimental focus, widespread reliance on micro theories, and a
growing emphasis on applied and translational research. At the same time, fundamental research is at
the risk of decline while theoretical work and cross-scale integration remain limited. This study provides
a framework for understanding neuroscience's trajectory and identifies potential avenues for
strengthening the field.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Introduction
We have a longstanding desire to decipher the mystery of our own mind1. While philosophy and
psychology have provided important insights regarding our cognitive and emotional makeup,
neuroscience is unique in its ambition to provide mechanistic explanations of the mind2. Modern
neuroscience, rooted in early work of Camillo Golgi and Santiago Ramón y Cajal3,4, has rapidly
advanced through seminal work such as Sherrington’s description of reflexes5, Hebb’s theories on
synaptic plasticity6, Hubel and Wiesel’s work on the visual cortex7–9, and the discovery of grid
cells10–12. Hand in hand with an ever-increasing pace of scientific discoveries also came
diversification of the field into increasingly specialized research domains, such as work specifically
devoted to the neural mechanisms underlying rare neurological syndromes (e.g.13–16). While this is a
natural tendency of scientific disciplines17,18, it obfuscates the interconnectedness of phenomena
and research questions and may thus hinder further progress19,20.
Consequently, there is an urgent need to provide a high-level perspective on the evolving
landscape of neuroscience21 that may help to integrate the field by identifying unifying principles,
methodological approaches, and shared open questions. Addressing this necessity, I have
compiled an extensive dataset of neuroscientific abstracts and their metadata spanning from 1999
to 2023 from Q1 and Q2 journals in the respective years according to the SCImago Country & Journal
Rank (SJR) database22. Utilizing state-of-the-art text embedding and clustering techniques, I
categorized the literature into 175 distinct research clusters, enabling a granular examination of
the field's dynamic trajectory over the past 25 years.
Through these clusters, I systematically map the structural organization of contemporary
neuroscience, identifying dominant themes as well as trends and open questions. By analyzing
inter-cluster citation networks, I reveal the extent to which different research domains interact,
distinguishing between insular clusters that primarily cite their own work and integrative clusters
that serve as intellectual bridges between domains. Furthermore, by characterizing clusters along
key dimensions, I provide a detailed account of how neuroscientific research is organized. The
work presented here thus offers a data-driven framework for understanding the evolution of
neuroscience that can inform future research directions and promote new collaborative initiatives
that bridge specialized domains and advance our collective understanding of the brain.

Results
Neuroscience Publishing Trends Over the Last 25 Years
My first goal was to provide a global snapshot of neuroscience publishing trends in the period from
1999 to 2023. To that end, I first identified all neuroscience journals ranked in the top two quartiles in
the respective years according to SCIMago Journal Rank. I supplemented these neuroscientific journals
with Q1 multidisciplinary journals that publish neuroscientific research such as Nature, Science and Plos
ONE. The next step involved querying PubMed for a maximum of 5,000 articles per year for each

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

selected journal. Through this procedure I obtained metadata and abstracts for research and review
articles, excluding editorials and similar content. However, the procedure also yielded articles from
disciplines other than neuroscience. To remove these, I embedded abstracts in a vector space using a
general-purpose text embedding model from Voyage AI and created a custom discipline classifier neural
network to filter out all non-neuroscience articles (see Methods for details).
This resulted in a dataset of 461,316 neuroscientific articles published in 375 journals between January
1999 and December 2023. The vast majority (88.16 %) of these are research articles. The total number
of both types of articles that could be obtained from PubMed increased over time (Figure 1b), with a
compound annual growth rate of 2.39% and 5.91% for research and review articles, respectively. While
research articles heavily outnumber reviews, reviews exhibit higher citation rates, defined as the total
number of citations divided by the article's age. On average, research articles receive 4.5 citations per
year (median = 2.5), whereas review articles receive 10 citations per year (median = 5.3; see Figure 1c
for distributions of log-transformed citation rates). Interestingly, the median citation rates (MCRs) of
both types of articles increased from 1999 to a peak in 2019, followed by a sharp decline. This rise and
fall pattern in MCR indicates that many articles experienced a period during which they were most
frequently cited sandwiched between an early phase when they were not yet receiving many citations
and a later phase when they were no longer receiving many citations. Indeed, most citations to articles
occur within one to 10 years following their publication with the peak typically at around three years
(see Supplementary Figure 1).
To further characterize the publishing landscape, I identified the top 10 primary outlets that
published the highest volume of neuroscience articles over the past 25 years (see Figure 1e) and
the top 10 high-impact journals (see Figure 1f), defined here by the highest MCRs for articles
published therein. The primary outlets list encompasses largely neuroscience specific journals
that cater to a broad range of subdisciplines such as The Journal of Neuroscience. The list of highimpact journals likewise comprises domain specific journals with a wide scope. However, in
contrast to the list of primary outlets, it contains a larger proportion of review-focused and highprofile multidisciplinary journals such as Nature and Science.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1: High-level descriptives. a, Division between research (purple) and review (orange) articles in the dataset. b, Division
between research and review articles in the dataset broken down by publication year. c, Distribution of log-transformed citation
rates of research and review articles. d, Median citation rates of research and review articles by the year they were published. e,
Number of articles in the dataset by the journal they were published in. Only the top 10 outlets are shown. F, Median citation
rates of articles published in a given journal. Only the journals with the top 10 MCR values are shown.

Research Domain Clusters
My second goal was to identify the distinct research domains that divide neuroscientific work. To that
end, I clustered abstracts based on their semantic similarity measured as cosine similarity between their
domain specific text embeddings. To achieve this, I first further embedded the abstract embeddings
obtained with the general-purpose Voyage AI embedding model into a lower-dimensional, domainspecific latent space (see Methods for details). I then constructed a semantic graph wherein each
abstract is connected to its 50 semantically nearest neighbors, with each link weighted by the cosine
similarity between its vertices. I then applied the Leiden community detection algorithm23 on this graph
to obtain clusters. For each cluster, I submitted abstracts of the 200 nearest neighbors to the cluster’s
centroid to a gpt-4o large language model (LLM) from OpenAI to describe the cluster. For clusters with
less than 200 articles, I submitted all available abstracts.
Clustering applied to embedded abstracts identified 175 unique clusters ranging in size from 9,155
(cluster 0) to 117 (cluster 174) articles (Figure 2a). For a detailed overview of all clusters see
Supplementary Table 1. The largest cluster involves research on the mechanisms of neuropathic pain
including spinal cord modulation, glial activation, and receptor-mediated processes. The smallest cluster
is concerned with the effects of electromagnetic fields emitted by mobile devices on brain function.
While most clusters are dominated by research articles, intriguingly two clusters contain more review
articles. Cluster 171, which investigates the pathophysiology and potential long-term effects of SARSCoV-2 on the nervous system, and cluster 173, which investigates the role of exosomes in
neurodegenerative disease. Cluster 171 also presents with the highest MCR for both research (8.1) and
review (11.1) articles, likely explained by the immense interest in SARS-CoV-2 generated by the global
pandemic24–26.
In terms of content, several clusters exhibit some degree of thematic overlap. A total of 14 clusters are
devoted to Alzheimer’s disease (AD), each investigating distinct but complementary aspects. For
example, cluster 1 investigates the role of amyloid beta peptides in the pathogenesis of AD whereas
Cluster 47 focuses on the pathophysiological mechanisms involving tau protein modifications.
Furthermore, cluster 73 focuses on neuroinflammatory processes involved in AD and cluster 85 explores
the use of cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and neuroimaging techniques to advance diagnostic accuracy.
This pattern is not unique to AD. There are nine clusters devoted to Parkinson’s, indicating that
neurodegenerative diseases form their own group of clusters. Apart from clusters devoted to specific
conditions, I also observed modality (e.g., vision and audition), cognitive/behavioral (e.g., decisionmaking, language, and memory), and methodological (functional neuroimaging, brain stimulation)
groups of clusters. Curiously, my examination did not reveal any theory-specific clusters, suggesting
that theoretical frameworks may be embedded within, rather than defining, research domains.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2: Research domain clusters. a, Number of articles within each cluster with review articles (orange) stacked on top of
research articles (purple). b, Median citation rates of research and review articles per cluster. Distributions of MCRs are
superimposed on the right. c, Cluster citation graph. Darker edges indicate higher citation density among articles within the
connected clusters. d, Reference Krackhardt coefficient for each cluster. Positive values (blue) indicate that articles within a
cluster primarily cite articles from other clusters. Negative values (red) indicate that articles within a cluster primarily cite
articles in the same cluster. e, Citation Krackhardt coefficient for each cluster. Positive values (blue) indicate that articles within
a cluster are primarily cited by articles from other clusters. Negative values (red) indicate that articles within a cluster are
primarily cited by articles from the same cluster.

To further examine how clusters relate to each other and fit into the global neuroscientific
landscape, I examined the interactions between clusters in terms of their citation structure. To that
end, I identified for each cluster which other cluster most frequently cites its articles, and which
other cluster most frequently gets cited by its articles. I used this information to construct a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

citation graph among clusters (Figure 2c). Each edge in the graph is weighted by the citation density
(fraction of articles that are cited to the fraction of articles that could be cited; see Methods for
details). Additionally, I computed the Krackhardt coefficient27 for each cluster’s incoming links
(citations) and outgoing links (references). For an overview of graph metrics per cluster see
Supplementary Table 2. Notably, 74.86% of clusters exhibit positive Krackhardt coefficients for
both citations and references. These clusters predominantly cite and are cited externally,
suggesting diffusion of knowledge across clusters. These clusters lean on research from other
clusters (indicated by a positive Krackhard coefficient for their references) but also provide insights
for other clusters (indicated by a positive Krackhardt coefficient for their citations). Cluster 159,
which focuses on the neural underpinnings of consciousness, is a notable example of an externally
focused cluster. Conversely, only 6.86% of clusters contain articles that frequently cite and are
cited internally, indicated by negative Krackhardt coefficients for both their reference and citation
patterns. For example, Cluster 23, which studies the mechanisms and outcomes of auditory
damage and repair, exhibits this pattern. Clusters such as these exhibit high internal cohesion and
specialization but are siloed off from the remainder of the field. Some clusters exhibit mixed
patterns. One such group (13.14%) maintains positive Krackhard coefficient for their references
but negative Krackhardt coefficient for their citations. This suggests that while these clusters
predominantly cite externally, their own articles are primarily cited internally. This pattern arises for
clusters that rely on insights and methodologies from other clusters but are thematically niche.
One example of this is cluster 28 which investigates the effects of adolescent binge drinking on
brain development. The obverse are clusters that cite internally while being predominantly cited
externally. I observed this pattern in 5.14% of clusters, but with negative Krackhard coefficients for
references close to zero implying that these clusters have only a slight tendency towards citing
internally. Cluster 40 is an example of this and focuses on advanced neuroimaging for
characterizing brain anatomy.
It is important to note that while the Krackhardt coefficient is useful for assessing whether a cluster
is more inward- or outward-focused, it does not necessarily indicate the overall influence of a
cluster. A cluster that is cited more frequently by articles outside its own domain may still not be a
major hub if it lacks high overall citation counts or network centrality. To gain a clearer picture of
which clusters play a pivotal role, I examined key citation graph metrics, including in-degree
(number of citing clusters), PageRank (influence within influential clusters), and betweenness
centrality (how well a cluster bridges different research areas). Several clusters emerge as critical
nodes within the neuroscience research network. Cluster 7 stands out as the most influential, with
the highest weighted in-degree (0.0125), highest PageRank (0.079), and high betweenness
centrality (10,789). Cluster 22 is another major hub, with a high in-degree (0.0057), PageRank
(0.051), and betweenness centrality (14,899). Looking at which clusters cite research in these
clusters suggests that they are central because they provide complementary insights or relevant
methodologies for other clusters. For example, cluster 22 (Molecular Mechanisms of Synaptic
Plasticity in the Hippocampus) feeds into cluster 60 (Mechanisms and Dynamics of AMPA Receptor
Trafficking and Synaptic Plasticity) and cluster 7 (Dynamic Functional Connectivity in Resting-State

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

fMRI) feeds into cluster 5 (Functional Connectivity and Network Dynamics in Preclinical and
Clinical Alzheimer's Disease). By contrast, clusters 150 and 72 are highly isolated with low indegree (0.00004 and 0.00009 respectively), PageRank scores (0.0010 and 0.0009) and
betweenness centrality (2,158 and 2,212). These clusters exhibit highly specialized research
focuses on thyroid hormones and vitamin D in neurodevelopment (cluster 150) and neuroendocrine
and autonomic mechanisms in cardiovascular regulation (cluster 72) which likely restrict their
integration into the broader neuroscientific landscape.

The Dimensions of Neuroscientific Research
I followed up these cluster-level analyses with a systematic effort to characterize the underlying
dimensions that define neuroscientific research. To that end, I defined 10 dimensions (Appliedness,
Methodological Approach, Species, Spatial Scale, Temporal Scale, Modality, Cognitive Complexity,
Theory Engagement, Theory Scope, and Interdisciplinarity) and submitted abstracts of the 250 nearest
neighbors to a cluster’s centroid to the LLM to characterize each cluster along these dimensions. A
detailed assessment of the dimensions in each cluster is provided in Supplementary Table 2. Note that
the categories that characterize a dimension are not mutually exclusive. A quantitative overview of
how many clusters qualify for categories is shown in Figure 3a and reveals a predominantly
experimental landscape (96% of clusters) that employs both hypothesis-driven (77%) and datadriven (67%) research. A large segment of neuroscientific research contains a theoretical element
in the sense that it employs computational modeling (46%). However, only 3% of clusters contain
work that develops, refines, or critiques conceptual frameworks and theories. This aligns with the
observation that neuroscience tends to employ micro-theories (64%), i.e., narrowly scoped
mechanistic accounts. Theories of intermediate scope in the form of domain-specific (35%) and
disease-specific (39%) are also prevalent. However, only 17% of clusters contain research that
employs overarching theoretical frameworks aiming to explain fundamental principles of brain
function. I observed that translational (55%) and clinical (30%) work sit atop a broad base of
fundamental science (81%). Many clusters contain work on rodents (74%) or humans (71%),
though non-human primates (33%) and other mammals (30%) also feature prominently.
Neuroscience generally shows a balanced division between spatiotemporal scales, though work at
the microsecond scale is sparse (6%). Finally, neuroscience displays high levels of interdisciplinarity,
with 82% of clusters scoring high or very high on this dimension.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: Dimensions that characterize neuroscience domain clusters. a, tree map visualizing number of clusters qualifying for a
given category separated by dimension. Size of region reflects the number of clusters. Note that dimensions are not exclusive,
and the same cluster may count towards several categories even within the same dimension. b, Phi correlation coefficients
between all pairs of categories. Colors of category labels correspond to colors in panel a and indicate the dimension.

I next sought to understand the extent to which dimensions co-occur by examining the Matthews
correlation (phi) coefficient between pairs of categories (Figure 3b). The Matthews phi coefficient is the
Pearson correlation coefficient estimated for two binary variables28. Please note that all reported pvalues are Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons. Focusing first on spatial and temporal scales,
it can be observed that molecular‐ and cellular‐level investigations frequently go hand in hand (φ =
0.5502, t(173) = 8.667, p << 0.0001). By contrast, both molecular and cellular scales are negatively
correlated with regional scale (φ = –0.4048, t(173) = –5.822, p << 0.0001 and φ = –0.3631, t(173) = –
5.126, p = 0.00148, respectively). The cellular scale also exhibits a negative correlation with the whole‐
brain scale (φ = –0.3773, t(173) = –5.359, p = 0.000497). Given that other correlations among spatial
scales are not significant, this suggests a separation of the micro from the meso and macro scales. For
temporal scales the interesting pattern emerges that neighboring scales are significantly correlated. For
example, minute and hour exhibit a correlation of 0.4880 (t(173) = 7.353, p << 0.0001) and hour and day
a correlation of 0.5142 (t(173) = 7.887, p << 0.0001). Only the consecutive pair of second and minute
does not exhibit a significant correlation. This suggests that temporal scales are bridged through
pairwise interactions rather than collectively. Interestingly, the molecular spatial scale is positively
associated with the lifetime temporal scale (φ = 0.3144, t(173) = 4.356, p = 0.04262). Otherwise, fast
temporal scales are negatively associated with small spatial scales (molecular – second: φ = –0.4640,
t(173) = –6.890, p << 0.0001; cellular – millisecond: φ = –0.3131, t(173) = –4.337, p = 0.04622; cellular –
second: φ = –0.3968, t(173) = –5.686, p = 0.000102; molecular – millisecond: φ = –0.3734, t(173) = –
5.294, p = 0.0006745).
I next examined how appliedness and theoretical scope interrelate. Notably, there is a sharp division
between fundamental and all forms of applied research. Specifically, fundamental research is
significantly anticorrelated with clinical (φ = –0.5496, t(173) = –8.6535, p << 0.0001), translational (φ = –
0.3441, t(173) = –4.8206, p = 0.00587), and method development (φ = –0.4553, t(173) = –6.7260, p <<
0.0001) approaches. At the same time, translational and clinical research (φ = 0.4321, t(173) = 6.3024, p
<< 0.0001) and method development and technological exploitation (φ = 0.6530, t(173) = 11.3418, p <<
0.0001) are positively associated. For theoretical scope, there is a negative correlation between micro
theories and overarching theoretical frameworks (φ = –0.3752, t(173) = –5.3234, p = 0.000588). Perhaps
unsurprisingly, both clinical and translational research is positively associated with work utilizing
disease-specific theoretical frameworks (clinical: φ = 0.3539, t(173) = 4.9763, p = 0.00293; translational:
φ = 0.4082, t(173) = 5.8821, p << 0.0001).
Lastly, I examined how modality and cognitive complexity interrelate. Note that modality refers to the
type of function being investigated, whereas cognitive complexity pertains to the complexity of the
function under study, ranging from basic sensory processing to advanced functions like decision-making
and social cognition. Behavioral and cognitive modalities (φ = 0.3482, t(173) = 4.8852, p = 0.00441),
sensorimotor and motor modalities (φ = 0.3996, t(173) = 5.7331, p << 0.0001), auditory and visual

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

modalities (φ = 0.6082, t(173) = 10.0770, p << 0.0001) were positively correlated. In terms of complexity,
low-level sensory and low-level motor processes were significantly related (φ = 0.3469, t(173) = 4.8652,
p = 0.00482). Motor (φ = 0.5305, t(173) = 8.2318, p << 0.0001) and sensorimotor modalities (φ = 0.4142,
t(173) = 5.9864, p << 0.0001) associate primarily with low-level motor processes. The somatosensory
modality is associated with low-level sensory functions (φ = 0.3143, t(173) = 4.3540, p = 0.04306) and
the cognitive modality with high cognitive complexity (φ = 0.3810, t(173) = 5.4200, p = 0.0003715).

Emerging Trends and Developments
My last goal was to identify current trends in neuroscience. At the individual cluster level, I examined
growth trends in terms of the size-adjusted annual growth rate, which quantifies the yearly increase in
article count for each cluster relative to its total number of articles. Figure 4 summarizes the results and
shows that a majority (52.0%) of clusters have increased their output above what is expected based on
increases in output of the discipline as a whole. One third of clusters exhibit stable output as they
neither decline nor exceed the growth of the discipline. It must be noted that depending on their exact
growth rate, these clusters may be considered to exhibit a relative decline as their growth is outpaced
by that of the discipline. Finally, 15.4% of clusters exhibit an absolute decline in their output. Notably,
the SARS-CoV-2 cluster (171) is among the ten fastest growing clusters. Generally, it appears that
growing clusters share a strong applied focus and target overarching themes such as neurodegeneration
(clusters 69 and 141), neuromodulation (clusters 167 and 168), and technological advancements in
neuroscience (clusters 94 and 120). By contrast, declining clusters reflect predominantly fundamental
research with a focus on receptor dynamics (clusters 9, 55, 60, 75, 89, 101, 124, and 135) and signaling
pathways (clusters 48 and 102). These extremes of the spectrum reflect larger trends across clusters.
While clusters containing fundamental research together are growing at a compound annual growth
rate of 1.89%, this is less than the growth exhibited by neuroscience as a whole (2.39%). By contrast,
clusters involving translational research, clinical research, method development, and technological
exploitation exhibit compound annual growth rates of 3.57%, 4.78%, 7.51%, and 7.80%, respectively.
I followed up on these quantitative analyses with a more in-depth, qualitative, analysis of recent trends
in neuroscience. First, I investigated the evolving themes within each research cluster by randomly
selecting up to 100 articles published between 2010 and 2021, along with the top 100 cited articles from
the same clusters since 2021. These selections were analyzed using an LLM with the objective to identify
both emerging and declining thematic and methodological trends. Furthermore, for each cluster, I
curated five review articles published in 2023 (part of the dataset) or 2024 and concurrently submitted
all full articles to the LLM to synthesize the major open questions highlighted therein. The detailed,
cluster-specific findings are presented in Supplementary Table 4. To develop a more holistic
understanding of overarching trends, I aggregated all cluster-specific trends and questions and tasked
the LLM with identifying overarching trends, transcendental questions, and necessary developments to
move the field forward. These results are summarized in table 1. Trends, questions and developments
are predominantly aligned with applied research. This is consistent with the growth patterns of the
research clusters, where applied areas are experiencing increased output. Notably, there is an

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

absence of calls to develop or test theoretical frameworks. This does not imply that such efforts
are absent in neuroscience, but they are less prominent relative to other trends.

Figure 4: Quantitative growth trends. a, Fractions of clusters that exhibit growth (blue), decline (red), or remain stable relative to
neuroscience as a whole. b, Normalized growth rates of each cluster. Colors as in panel a. The horizontal black line indicates the
normalized growth rate of neuroscience. c, Number of articles in the dataset for the ten most growing clusters broken down by
year. d, Number of articles in the dataset for the ten most declining clusters broken down by year.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table 1: Emerging Trends, Key Scientific Questions, and Necessary Developments in Neuroscience
Overarching Trends

Transcendental Questions

Necessary Developments

Integration of multi-omics and advanced
imaging techniques in neuroscience
research is gaining momentum, providing a
comprehensive understanding of
neurological disorders and cognitive
functions by combining genomic,
transcriptomic, proteomic, and imaging
data.
There is an increasing focus on sex
differences and individualized approaches
in the study of neurological disorders and
therapeutics, emphasizing the importance
of personalized medicine and targeted
interventions.

How can novel methodologies like
single-cell RNA sequencing and cryoelectron microscopy be used to
uncover the precise mechanisms of
synaptic plasticity and neuronal
connectivity in various neurological
disorders?

Integration of multi-modal imaging
and sequencing technologies to
understand complex brain network
dynamics in real-world environments,
highlighting the need to combine
advanced neuroimaging with gene
expression data.

How do genetic and environmental
factors interact to influence
susceptibility to neurological
diseases, and how can this
knowledge inform personalized
medicine approaches?

The use of machine learning and artificial
intelligence in analyzing complex datasets
such as neuroimaging, electrophysiological
recordings, and behavioral data is
enhancing the precision of diagnostic and
therapeutic strategies across various
neurological and psychiatric conditions.
Neuroinflammation and immune pathways
are recognized as critical components in
the pathogenesis and progression of
neurodegenerative diseases, highlighting
novel therapeutic targets and the
importance of glial cell functions.

In what ways can artificial
intelligence and machine learning be
integrated with neuroimaging and
other 'omics' data to enhance our
understanding of brain disorders and
improve diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches?
What roles do neuroimmune
interactions and inflammation play
across different neurodegenerative
and psychiatric disorders, and can
they be harnessed for therapeutic
interventions?

The importance of neuroplasticity and the
dynamic reconfiguration of neural
networks is emphasized in understanding
cognitive processes, learning, memory, and
recovery from brain injuries, offering new
insights into adaptive neural changes.

What are the mechanisms behind
neuroplasticity and connectivity
changes in response to both
pathological and therapeutic
interventions, and how can this
knowledge be applied to enhance
cognitive and motor recovery?

Development of comprehensive,
personalized therapeutic
interventions targeting
neurodegenerative and psychological
disorders by leveraging insights from
genetic, environmental, and
neuroinflammatory factors.
Integration of AI and machine
learning across neuroscience
research to improve diagnostic
accuracy and develop predictive
models for neurological and
psychiatric condition progression,
incorporating multi-modal datasets.
Advancement in the understanding
and therapeutic targeting of
neuroimmune and
neuroinflammatory pathways in
diseases like Alzheimer's, which
requires integrating genomic data
with inflammation and gut-brain axis
research.
Expansion of high-resolution and
non-invasive brain imaging
technologies to better capture and
predict neurodegenerative and
neuropsychiatric disease progression
in personalized medicine approaches.

Emerging non-invasive and precise
neuromodulation techniques, such as
ultrasound and optogenetics, show
promise in modulating neural circuits for
therapeutic interventions in neurological
disorders, focusing on targeted and
adaptable treatment strategies.
Neurodevelopmental and
neurodegenerative diseases are
increasingly being studied through
advanced models like organoids, induced
pluripotent stem cells, and detailed
human-specific studies, refining insights
into disease mechanisms and therapeutic
approaches.
Research into the gut-brain axis and its
influence on neurodegenerative and
psychiatric disorders is expanding,

How can single-cell and multi-modal
data from transcriptomics,
proteomics, and imaging be
combined to elucidate cell-typespecific roles in neural development
and neurodegeneration?

Breakthrough in targeted modulation
of specific brain circuits using noninvasive technologies like focused
ultrasound, emphasizing the need for
precision in neuromodulation
therapies for conditions like
depression and epilepsy.
Innovation in regenerative medicine
and organoid technology to provide
new insights into human
developmental disorders and
neurodegeneration, using advanced
materials and engineering methods.

How do gut-brain interactions
contribute to the onset and
progression of neurodegenerative

Comprehensive modeling of the gutbrain axis to uncover its involvement
in neurological health and disease

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

exploring the role of microbiota and gutderived metabolites in brain health and
disease, with potential for microbiomebased interventions.

Astrocytes and glial cells are increasingly
recognized for their active roles in
neurophysiology and neuroprotection,
influencing synaptic plasticity,
neuroinflammation, and disease
progression, representing potential
therapeutic targets for CNS disorders.
Neurosymbolic integration and
neuromorphic computing are advancing in
neuroscience, emulating biological brain
functions in artificial systems and
enhancing understanding in cognition and
decision-making processes.

diseases, and what therapeutic
interventions can modulate these
pathways for disease prevention and
treatment?
What are the signaling pathways
involved in the neuroprotective
mechanisms against stress and
trauma, and can they be modulated
for therapeutic benefits in
neuropsychiatric conditions?
How can advances in real-time and
multi-modal imaging technologies
deepen our understanding of
dynamic brain processes and guide
the development of effective
interventions for cognitive and
behavioral disorders?

What role do epigenetic
modifications and regulatory RNA
molecules play in the pathogenesis of
psychiatric and neurodegenerative
disorders, and how can these be
targeted for novel therapies?

states, particularly in the context of
neurodegenerative and psychiatric
disorders.

Elucidation of the mechanistic role
and therapeutic potential of
astrocytes and microglia in synaptic
plasticity and neurodegenerative
conditions, using advanced tools like
optogenetics and CRISPR for
functional insights.

Improvement in the understanding of
synaptic interaction mechanisms
using advanced imaging and
computational tools, focusing on
neurotransmitter dynamics and
synaptic plasticity in health and
disease.

Discussion
The present study provides a comprehensive, data-driven mapping of the evolving landscape of
neuroscience over a quarter of a century. Over that time, neuroscience publishing has expanded
steadily21, with broad neuroscientific journals as primary outlet. Research articles consistently
outnumber reviews. The latter, however, exhibits vastly higher citation rates. The journals with the
highest impact thus unsurprisingly comprising review-focused neuroscientific journals, but also highprestige multidisciplinary journals. A clustering analysis identified 175 distinct research domains,
revealing the structural organization of neuroscience with diverse themes such as neuropathic pain,
neural underpinnings of consciousness, and EEG-based brain-computer interfaces. While several clusters
are devoted to specific diseases, modalities, methods, and cognitive function, notably not a single
cluster is dedicated to a theoretical framework.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

An analysis of the cluster-level citation network revealed that most clusters integrate and spread
insights from diverse research domains. Key hub clusters play a central role in shaping neuroscience by
providing methodological and conceptual foundations for other clusters. Some clusters, however, are
highly specialized and remain largely isolated from the broader research landscape. The dimensional
analysis of neuroscientific research reveals that the field is predominantly experimental, with both
hypothesis-driven and data-driven approaches. While computational work is prevalent, theoretical work
remains limited. Furthermore, the field tends to employ micro theories more than overarching
theoretical frameworks. This observation aligns with the lack of theory-focused clusters. Additionally,
neuroscience exhibits clear structural divides, including a sharp distinction between fundamental and
applied research and a separation of micro- and macro-level spatial scales. Interestingly, temporal scales
are pairwise, but never fully integrated. Finally, a trends analysis revealed that neurosciences exhibit a
shift towards more applied and translational research, with growing clusters focusing on
neurodegeneration, neuromodulation, and technological advancements, while traditionally dominant
fundamental research areas, such as receptor dynamics and intracellular signaling pathways, are in
decline. The rapid growth of the SARS-CoV-2 cluster indicates that neuroscience is quick to respond to
global events. Additionally, I observed an increasing emphasis on multi-omics integration, machine
learning applications, precision neuromodulation, and neuroimmune interactions.
Overall, neuroscience appears to be thriving as it maintains a high output across diverse topics ranging
from neurodegenerative diseases, neuromodulation, cognitive functions, to technological advances.
Despite this diversity, neuroscience achieves a high level of integration and extensive knowledge
exchange across its domains. Targeted collaborations across clusters could further enhance this
integration. The field also maintains a good balance between fundamental and applied research as well
as between hypothesis-driven and data-driven approaches. Finally, neuroscience spans all levels of
organization, from molecular and cellular studies to whole-brain dynamics and is highly interdisciplinary.
However, the field also faces challenges. First, while there is still a balance, fundamental research is
losing ground. Growth trends show that applied research is expanding, while fundamental research is in
relative decline. The underlying reasons for this shift remain unclear. It could reflect a change in funding
priorities, where agencies increasingly emphasize clinical and technological applications. Alternatively, it
may indicate a natural progression, where certain foundational questions have been sufficiently
addressed, allowing researchers to pivot toward more application-driven investigations. Regardless of
the cause, this trend raises important questions about the long-term trajectory of neuroscience. If the
shift toward applied research continues, will neuroscience still generate foundational discoveries at a
sufficient rate? To address this, future studies could systematically assess the distribution of funding
across fundamental and applied domains. In the meantime, funding agencies should establish dedicated
initiatives supporting fundamental research to prevent erosion of the foundational knowledge upon
which future breakthroughs depend.
Second, while neuroscience spans all spatial and temporal scales, integration across these scales
remains limited. There is, for instance, a clear divide between small and large spatial scales. Additionally,
temporal scales are only integrated in a pairwise manner, leaving connections between different
timescales indirect. An important question is whether these divisions reflect a meaningful organizational

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

principle of the brain. Processes unfolding at certain scales may simply not be relevant for
understanding processes at other scales as each constitutes a self-contained system whose governing
principles, despite emerging from smaller scales, nevertheless operate independently29,30. For example,
network dynamics in large-scale brain activity may follow principles that are not directly predictable
from individual neuronal processes. If this is the case, neuroscience may need to develop better
theoretical models to formalize and justify these separations. Alternatively, the divide between research
at different scales may simply be a byproduct of disciplinary specialization. In that case neuroscientists
should explore systematic ways to more comprehensively bridge spatial and temporal scales. The
development of standardized methods to analyze multi-modal datasets at different levels of neural
organization will be essential for this31–33. Additionally, computational modeling may offer a means to
connect findings across scales and to reveal unifying principles underlying neural organization34,35.
A third and perhaps more fundamental limitation is the field’s predominant reliance on highly specific
micro theories rather than broader theoretical frameworks. While computational models are widely
used to test mechanistic hypotheses, theoretical work that develops and refines conceptual frameworks
is notably scarce. This raises the question whether neuroscience should actively seek to develop unifying
theories, or whether its empirical diversity is best served by maintaining a collection of specialized
models. A focus on micro theories allows for targeted, mechanistically detailed explanations that are
closely tied to empirical data, but it may also lead to redundant or disconnected research efforts. As a
first step, neuroscience could benefit from explicit efforts to determine whether different micro theories
represent truly distinct explanations or special cases of more general principles. Encouraging theoretical
work that systematically connects micro theories may help to uncover hidden commonalities across
seemingly disparate mechanisms, potentially leading to more cohesive explanatory paradigms. Funding
agencies should therefore support theoretical initiatives that aim to unify disparate mechanistic
accounts, and theoretical neuroscience must be recognized as an essential component of the field.
The dataset compiled in this study provides a valuable foundation for addressing the challenges faced by
neuroscience. It enables researchers to trace the evolution of theories, identifying how certain
frameworks, such as predictive coding, emerge and integrate into different research domains.
Additionally, the dataset allows for future work to provide a more granular investigation of the
interactions between different research dimensions, such as methodological approaches, spatial and
temporal scales, and appliedness, through association rule mining. By assessing citation patterns within
and between clusters over time, the dataset provides a means to evaluate whether specific clusters
have become more insular or have increasingly engaged with the broader neuroscientific community.
Finally, the dataset also enables an article-level analysis of citation dynamics that may be used to
uncover why certain articles gain prominence while others remain relatively obscure despite potential
thematic similarities. By making this dataset openly available, I aim to accelerate meta-research in
neuroscience and to drive the next generation of neuroscientific discoveries.
Equally important, the thematic diversification evident in my dataset highlights that the next generation
of neuroscientists need to be comfortable working across multiple domains and able to synthesize
diverse insights into cohesive frameworks. Programs such as the Brain Science bachelor's degree at
Maastricht University exemplify an educational approach that actively promotes such integration.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Expanding such transdisciplinary education is crucial for cultivating researchers who can connect
fundamental and applied research, integrate findings across scales, and develop more comprehensive
theoretical models
In conclusion, neuroscience is a thriving and interdisciplinary field, but recognizing and addressing its
structural limitations is crucial for future progress. The findings of this study highlight that ensuring that
fundamental research remains valued, greater integration across spatiotemporal scales, and increased
theoretical synthesis could strengthen the field.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Methods
Data Source and Extraction
The PubMed database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Pubmed) was used as data source for obtaining abstracts
and metadata of neuroscientific articles published between 1999 and 2025. I used the Bio.Entrez
(version 1.71) package for Python (version 31.12) to programmatically query the database with the
following query search query: ("{journal}"[Journal]) AND (("{year}/01/01"[Date - Publication] :
"{year}/12/31"[Date - Publication])). Here journal and year were variables that were assigned based on
yearly journal ranks provided by the SCImago Country & Journal Rank (SJR) database22. Specifically, for
each year from 1999 to 2023, I queried all journals ranked within the first two quartiles of the
neuroscience rankings provided by SJR. Additionally, for each year, I queried all journals within the first
quartile of multidisciplinary rankings provided by SJR. These were included because multidisciplinary
journals such as Nature and Science are valuable outlets for neuroscientific research. Finally, I queried
journals that ranked in the first quartile for all other disciplines defined by SJR for the years 2000, 2010,
and 2020. These were included to train a discipline classifier (see below). For each query, a maximum of
5,000 PubMed entries was obtained. Queries were performed between April 15th 2024 and April 18th
2024. For each article resulting from PubMed queries, I extracted its PubMed ID, its digital object
identifier (doi), the journal it was published in as well as the month and year of publication, its title,
abstract, its type. I rejected all articles that were not of research or review type and removed all articles
whose abstracts had less than 50 or more than 500 words. Between December 27th 2024 and January 3rd
2025, I obtained citation counts for articles in the dataset, ensuring that each article had at least one full
year for accumulating citations. Based on the publication date, I computed article age in years with
respect to January 3rd 2025 and used this age to compute citation ratios as the citation count divided by
age.

Data Filtering
The journals used in my queries do not exclusively publish neuroscientific work. To reduce the dataset to
neuroscientific articles, I used a neural network trained on a multi-label discipline classification task. The
discipline classifier network is a fully connected neural network. The architecture consisted of an input
layer receiving 1024-dimensional text embeddings, two hidden layers with 256 and 64 exponential linear
units (ELUs), and an output layer with 26 sigmoid-activated units, each corresponding to a discipline. To
prevent overfitting, a dropout layer with a probability of 0.5 was applied before the final classification
layer. The input embeddings were generated using the voyage-lite-02-instruct model from Voyage AI, a
general-purpose text embedding model.
To train the discipline classifier, a labeled training dataset was constructed. First all articles from nonneuroscientific journals were included. Then 5% of all articles in journals publishing neuroscience were
included. Labels for each article were obtained from the discipline assessment provided by SJR for each
journal. Importantly, these labels are accurate at the journal level but not at the article level. A
particular article published in a journal that publishes neuroscience but also other subdisciplines of life
science, might nevertheless be a pure neuroscientific article. For this reason, training was performed in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

three stages. In a pre-training phase, the classifier was trained for 25 epochs on a subset of the training
data limited to articles from journals that exclusively publish in a single discipline.
Following pretraining, the classifier was applied to a broader set of articles, including those from
multidisciplinary journals. All discipline labels falling below 99% of the maximum class probability were
removed. Note that this does not remove any articles; rather, only discipline labels were discarded while
simultaneously ensuring that each article retained at least one label. The classifier was then trained for
50 additional epochs, incorporating these high-confidence self-labeled samples. In the final stage, the
model was fine-tuned for 10 additional epochs using again only articles from journals that exclusively
publish in a single discipline. In all stages, data was subdivided into training (80%), validation (10%), and
test (10%) subsets. No explicit class balancing techniques, such as resampling or weighting in the loss
function, were applied. Training in all stages was conducted using binary cross-entropy loss, an Adam
optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0002, and a batch size of 64.
After training, the labeled articles used for training were assessed for inclusion in the final neuroscience
dataset. The articles originally selected from exclusively neuroscience journals were automatically
retained since they were already part of the intended dataset. For each article published in journals that
do not exclusively publish neuroscientific work, I used the discipline classifier network to identify
whether neuroscience was within 80% of the most probable discipline. This threshold was chosen to
ensure that only articles with a strong neuroscientific focus were included while minimizing the risk of
discarding relevant research. Articles that did not meet this criterion were removed.

Semantic Clustering
To identify domain clusters in neuroscience, I initially embedded abstracts of all articles in the final
dataset in a neuroscience-specific latent space to be able to assess semantic similarity between articles.
This proceeded in two stages. First, I embedded all abstracts using the general-purpose voyage-large-02instruct text embedding model from Voyage AI. Then I further embedded the resulting vector
representations using a custom neural network to obtain neuroscience-specific representation of article
abstracts. The network comprised three fully connected layers with progressively smaller dimensions,
reducing the input 1024-dimensional embeddings to a 64-dimensional domain-specific embedding
space. Batch normalization was applied after the first and second fully connected layers to improve
training stability and accelerate convergence. An ELU activation function followed each of these
layers to introduce non-linearity, and dropout was applied immediately after the ELU activation in
both the first and second hidden layers, with a dropout rate of 0.1 to mitigate overfitting. The output
of the final layer was L2-normalized, ensuring that all embeddings had unit length.
The network was trained using a contrastive learning approach with an N-pair loss function. The
objective was to learn a representation where semantically similar articles were mapped closer together
while dissimilar articles were pushed apart. To define training pairs dynamically, cosine similarity was
computed between the general-purpose embeddings that served as input to the network. Pairs of
articles with an initial embedding cosine similarity of at least 0.85 were designated as positive pairs,
while pairs with a similarity below 0.75 were assigned as negative pairs. Intermediate cases, where
similarity fell between these thresholds, were excluded from training. Similarity cutoffs for defining

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

positive and negative pairs were defined based on domain knowledge and manual inspection.
Specifically, I computed the cosine similarity between the embedded representations of a set of
abstracts that I had judged to be part of the same research domain and compared this to the similarity
between abstracts that I classified as belonging to different subdomains. A substantial portion of the
dataset, approximately 95%, served as training dataset. The remaining 5% of the dataset was reserved
for validation to monitor convergence and prevent overfitting. The training dataset was used to optimize
the embedding network with an Adam optimizer, an initial learning rate of 0.0001, and an L2 weight
decay of 0.01 to improve generalization. A batch size of 256 was used. The learning rate was scheduled
to decrease exponentially over the course of 2000 epochs, with a decay factor of 0.995 per epoch.
Additionally, an L2 regularization weight of 0.01 and a correlation weight of 0.1 were applied to further
constrain the learned representations and promote meaningful structure in the latent space. To
accelerate training convergence and improve generalization, I incorporated Grokfast36, a method that
amplifies slow gradients during optimization, with a smoothing coefficient of 0.98 and an amplification
factor 2.
Following training, the learned embeddings were used to construct a similarity graph of neuroscientific
research, where each node represents an article and edges between nodes are weighted by their cosine
similarity. A K-NN search was performed using FAISS to retrieve the top 50 most similar neighbors for
each article and add these as edges to the graph. This results in a directed graph because an article
might be among the top 50 nearest neighbors of another article, but not vice versa. I symmetrized the
graph by adding bidirectional edges.
The resulting undirected, weighted graph served as the foundation for clustering neuroscience into
distinct research domains using Leiden community detection23. Leiden clustering was performed using
the Constant Potts Model (CPM)37, which allows for resolution tuning to optimize the balance between
intra-cluster density and inter-cluster separation. To systematically determine the optimal resolution
parameter, clustering was conducted across 1000 resolution values, evenly spaced between 0.001 and
1.0. To identify the optimal resolution, modularity scores were monitored, and clustering was halted
early if modularity exhibited a consistent downward trend across five consecutive resolution steps. The
best resolution parameter was selected as the value that maximized modularity across the examined
range. Articles were then assigned to clusters based on the optimal Leiden partition, and these cluster
assignments were mapped back to the original dataset.

Citation Density Graph
To construct a citation density graph at the cluster level, I first extracted citation and reference
relationships for each article in the dataset. For each article, I retrieved the PubMed IDs of all articles
citing it (incoming citations) and all articles it cited (outgoing references). Only linked PubMed IDs
present in the dataset were retained. I next computed citation density between all pairs of clusters by
identifying all articles that cite across clusters and normalizing this by the number of possible citations,
taking the relative article ages into account. Additionally, for each cluster I identified the clusters whose
articles most frequently cite articles in the clusters and whose articles most frequently get cited by
articles in the cluster. Finally, I constructed a weighted and directed citation density graph by connecting

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

each cluster to their most citing and most cited clusters and weighing these connections by the citation
density.

Metrics
Compound Annual Growth Rate
The com =pound annual growth rate over the period from 𝑡𝑡0 to 𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑛 is given by �
𝑉𝑉 (𝑡𝑡0 ) is the is the initial value and 𝑉𝑉 (𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑛 ) is the final value.

1

𝑉𝑉(𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑛 ) 𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑛 −𝑡𝑡0
�
− 1, where
𝑉𝑉(𝑡𝑡0 )

Size-Adjusted Annual Growth Rate

The size-adjusted annual growth rate is given by

𝑁𝑁𝑐𝑐

𝛽𝛽𝑐𝑐

, where 𝛽𝛽𝑐𝑐 is the slope obtained from a linear

𝐸𝐸

−𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

regression of the number of articles in cluster 𝑐𝑐 as a function of years and 𝑁𝑁𝑐𝑐 is the total number of
articles in cluster over the entire period.

Krackhardt Coefficient
The Krackhardt coefficient (E/I-ratio) is given by 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜

and 𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 the number of internal citations.

𝐸𝐸𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 +𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

, where 𝐸𝐸𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 is the number of external citations

LLM-Based Analyses

I conducted several semantic analyses of the domain clusters with the aid of OpenAI’s gpt-4o-2024-0806 large language model (LLM). First, I obtained a title, short description, relevant keywords, and a
classification of the primary focus (thematic or methodological) for each cluster by submitting up to
200 abstracts of each cluster to the LLM. For clusters with less than 200 articles, I submitted all
abstracts. For clusters with more than 200 articles, I selected those whose abstracts were most similar
to the cluster centroid in the previously computed semantic embedding space. The selected abstracts
were formatted and submitted to the LLM using the LangChain API (version 0.3.4 of langchain and 0.1.2
of langchain_voyageai), with the following prompt:
You are provided with a list of scientific abstracts that belong to a
specific research cluster. Your task is to:
1. **Identify the most frequent and relevant keywords and phrases** used in
the abstracts within this cluster. The keywords should accurately
characterize the research within the cluster and avoid wrong assertions.
2. **Provide a descriptive title** for the cluster that encapsulates the main
themes and methodologies.
3. **Write a brief summary** (1-2 sentences) that describes the main themes
and methodologies of the cluster.
4. **Determine the main focus** of the cluster, whether it is on the themes
or methodologies. A methodological focus is when a cluster focuses on method
development or consistently applies a specific methodology. A thematic focus
is when a cluster consistently studies a specific phenomenon.
**Output Format:**

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Please present your findings in **JSON format** with the following structure:
"Keywords": ["keyword1", "keyword2", "keyword3", ...],
"Title": "Descriptive Cluster Title",
"Description": "Brief summary of the cluster's main themes and
methodologies."
"Focus": "The main focus of the cluster is either on the themes or
methodologies."
```
**Instructions:**
- **Accuracy is crucial**: Ensure all information is directly supported by
the provided abstracts. Do not include information not present in the
abstracts or make external assumptions.
- **Clarity and Precision**: The keywords, title, and description should be
clear and accurately reflect the content of the abstracts.
- **Conciseness**: Do not include any additional text or explanations beyond
the specified JSON output. Do not generate more output than necessary.
**Here are the abstracts:**
{abstracts}

The generated JSON data was automatically extracted and integrated into the dataset. The prompt was
designed to minimize the risk of hallucination or speculative assertions by the model, as it was explicitly
instructed to rely solely on the provided abstracts.
To better understand what distinguishes similar clusters, I identified the most similar cluster for each of
the 175 clusters. For each cluster, I then submitted the 100 articles that were most similar to the other
cluster’s centroid as well as the 100 articles of the other cluster that were most similar to its centroid to
the LLM with the following prompt:
You are provided with two sets of neuroscientific abstracts from Cluster A
and Cluster B, which are similar in nature. Analyze the abstracts from both
clusters and identify the most distinguishing features that separate Cluster
A from Cluster B with high accuracy and conciseness.
**Instructions:**
- Return your findings **only** in JSON format.
- The JSON should contain a single field named `"Distinguishing Features"`.
- Do **not** include any other text, explanations, or comments.
- Do **not** include more than three features.
- Always contrast the features of Cluster A with Cluster B.
- Keep the feature descriptions short (1 or 2 sentences) and simple. Nonexperts must be able to understand.
**Example Output:**

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

```json
{{
"Distinguishing Features": "Feature 1 description; Feature 2 description;
Feature 3 description"
}}

**Cluster A Abstracts:**
{cluster_a_abstracts}
**Cluster B Abstracts:**
{cluster_b_abstracts}

The generated JSON data was automatically extracted and integrated into the dataset.
Subsequently, I utilized the LLM to assess research within each cluster along 9 research dimensions:
appliedness, modality, spatiotemporal scale, cognitive complexity, species, theory engagement, theory
scope, methodological approach, and interdisciplinarity. To that end, I submitted up to 250 abstracts of
each cluster together with the cluster title to the LLM using the following prompt:
You are an expert in neuroscience and scientific text analysis.
You are provided with a list of neuroscientific abstracts that belong to the
cluster '{title}'.
Your task is to identify **key neuroscience dimensions** that best describe
the cluster, guided by the following 9 dimensions:
1. Appliedness: The extent to which the research is basic science
(fundamental mechanisms) or applied (translational, clinical, method
development, advancing technology).
2. Modality: The sensory and/or motor modality under investigation (e.g.,
visual, auditory, gustatory, somatosensory, motor, sensorimotor, multimodal).
3. Spatiotemporal Scale: The spatial (e.g., molecular, cellular, circuit,
region, systems, whole-brain) and temporal (e.g., microsecond, millisecond,
second, minute, hour, day, week, month, year, lifetime) scale of the
research.
4. Cognitive Complexity: The level of cognitive complexity under
investigation from low level (e.g., sensory processing, motor control) to
high level (e.g., language, decision making, social cognition).
5. Species: The species under investigation (e.g., human, non-human primate,
rodent, drosophila, zebrafish, C. elegans).
6. Theory Engagement: The extent to which the research is theory-driven
(hypothesis testing) or data-driven (exploratory, descriptive).
7. Theory Scope: The scope of the theory under investigation, ranging from
specific mechanisms to broad overarching theories of the brain. Intermediate
between these are theories focusing on pathophysiology of a specific disorder

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

and highly influential theories with narrow domain coverage. Indiciate the
specific unifying theoretical frameworks (e.g., Predictive Coding, Critical
Brain Hypothesis, Communication through Coherence, Free Energy Principle,
Active Inference, Global Neuronal Workspace, Integrated Information Theory,
etc.) if applicable (else, no general theory). There might be more than one
framework.
8. Methodological Approach: The methodological approach used in the research
(e.g., experimental, computational, theoretical, modeling, simulation, data
analysis, review, meta-analysis, etc.). Identify specific methods if
applicable (e.g., optogenetics, fMRI, EEG, MEG, TMS, lesion studies, singleunit recordings, etc.). There might be more than one method.
9. Interdisciplinarity: The extent to which the research is
interdisciplinary, combining methods and concepts from multiple fields (e.g.,
medicine, biology, chemsitry, psychology, computer science, physics,
engineering, mathematics, philosophy).
Examples are not exhaustive and abstracts may contain multiple dimensions.
**Output Format:**
Please present your findings in **JSON format** with the following structure:
{{
"Dimension 1 - Appliedness": "Brief assessment of the research's
appliedness.",
"Dimension 2 - Modality": "Brief overview of the sensory and/or motor
modality under investigation.",
"Dimension 3 - Spatiotemporal Scale": "Brief description of the spatial and
temporal scale of the research.",
"Dimension 4 - Cognitive Complexity": "Brief assessment of the research's
cognitive complexity.",
"Dimension 5 - Species": "Brief overview of the species under
investigation.",
"Dimension 6 - Theory Engagement": "Brief assessment of the research's theory
engagement.",
"Dimension 7 - Theory Scope": "Brief assessment of the research's theory
scope. Identify specific theoretical frameworks if applicable. There might be
more than one framework. Not all articles need to fall under any specific
framework, but a significant portion should (one or two are not enough).",
"Dimension 8 - Methodological Approach": "Brief overview of the
methodological approach used in the research. Identify specific methods if
applicable. There might be more than one method.",
"Dimension 9 - Interdisciplinarity": "Brief assessment of the research's
interdisciplinarity."
}}
```

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

**Instructions:**
- **Accuracy is crucial**: Ensure all information is directly supported by
the provided abstracts. Do not include information not present in the
abstracts or make external assumptions.
- **Clarity and Precision**: Assessments and descriptions should be clear and
accurately reflect the content of the abstracts.
- **Conciseness**: Do not include any additional text or explanations beyond
the specified JSON output. Do not generate more output than necessary.
**Here are the abstracts:**
{abstracts}

The generated JSON data was automatically extracted and integrated into the dataset. It was also used
for a second-level assessment of research dimensions along specific categories within each dimension.
For this analysis, I split spatiotemporal scale into two dimensions, spatial scale and temporal scale. To
obtain a binary judgment whether a cluster qualifies for a particular category, I submitted the verbal
assessment of a cluster’s dimensions to the LLM together with specific instructions to evaluate a
particular category belonging to a particular dimension. I used the following prompt for this purpose:
You are an expert in neuroscience.
You are provided with an analysis of research within a neuroscientific
cluster along the following 9 dimensions:
1. Appliedness: The extent to which the research is basic science
(fundamental) or applied in one of several ways.
2. Modality: The sensory and/or motor modality under investigation.
3. Spatiotemporal Scale: The spatial and temporal scale of the research. Can
vary from microscale to macroscale for both space and time.
4. Cognitive Complexity: The level of cognitive complexity under
investigation from low level (e.g., sensory processing, motor control) to
high level (e.g., language, decision making, social cognition).
5. Species: The species under investigation.
6. Theory Engagement: The extent to which the research is theory-driven
(hypothesis testing) or data-driven (exploratory, descriptive).
7. Theory Scope: The scope of the theory under investigation. Overarching
Framework: In neuroscience, an overarching framework is a broad theoretical
approach that aims to explain fundamental principles of brain function across
multiple cognitive and neural domains.
Domain Framework: In neuroscience, a domain framework is an integrative
theory focusing on a specific subfield, offering cohesive principles for that
area.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Disease-specific Framework: In neuroscience, a disease-specific framework is
a theory that details the neural causes, mechanisms, and manifestations of a
particular neurological or psychiatric condition.
Micro Theory: In neuroscience, a micro theory is a narrowly scoped,
mechanistic account or model that explains one specific process or phenomenon
in the brain.
8. Methodological Approach: The methodological approach used in the research.
Experimental: Studies in which researchers deliberately manipulate one or
more variables under controlled conditions to test for causal effects.
Observational (Correlational / Descriptive): Studies that measure variables
in naturally occurring settings without introducing any active intervention,
focusing on describing or correlating observed phenomena.
Computational / coding: Studies that construct or test mathematical,
algorithmic, or simulation-based models to predict, explain, or interpret
empirical data or biological processes.
Theoretical / Conceptual: Work that develops, refines, or critiques
conceptual frameworks and theories without generating new empirical data or
running computational simulations.
Meta-Analytic / Systematic Review: Research that synthesizes and reanalyzes
existing primary studies, systematically aggregating findings using
quantitative (meta-analysis) or rigorous protocol-based (systematic review)
methods.
9. Interdisciplinarity: The extent to which the research is
interdisciplinary, combining methods and concepts from multiple fields. From
low (confined to a single discipline) to very high (incorporating multiple
disciplines in a transcdisciplinary manner).
Multidisciplinary: Multiple disciplines study the same problem in parallel,
each applying its own methods and perspectives but with little crossintegration.
Interdisciplinary: Researchers from different disciplines integrate theories,
methods, or data to create shared frameworks or solutions that transcend any
single field.
Transdisciplinary: Collaboration goes beyond standard academic boundaries,
involving non-academic stakeholders or merging disciplines so completely that
new fields or holistic approaches emerge.
Your task is to focus solely on the dimension of {dimension} and provide a
binary indication ("yes" or "no") of whether the research within the cluster
falls within the specified categories.
Here are the categories for this dimension:
{categories}
**Output Format:**
Please present your findings in **JSON format** with the following structure:
{{

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

"Category 1": "yes" / "no",
"Category 2": "yes" / "no",
"Category 3": "yes" / "no",
...
category n: "yes" / "no"
}}
```
**Instructions:**
- **Accuracy is crucial**: Ensure all information is directly supported by
the provided analysis. Do not include information not present in the analysis
or make external assumptions.
- **Consisteny**: Ensure that the evaluation of the dimension does not
contradict the provided analysis (including other dimensions).
- **Focus and Precision**: Only evaluate the dimension of {dimension} and
provide a binary response for each category. Do not include any additional
information or explanations.
- **Proper Category Naming**: Ensure that the categories are named correctly
and accurately reflect the content of the analysis. ONLY use the provided
categories and replace Category 1, Category 2, etc. with the actual category
names.
- **Binary Response**: Ensure that the response for each category is binary
(yes or no) and does not include any other text or explanations.

**Here is the analysis of the research within the cluster along the dimension
of {dimension}:**
{analysis}

The generated JSON data was automatically extracted and integrated into the dataset.
Next, I used the LLM to analyze emerging trends in the field. To that end, I submitted abstracts of up to
200 randomly selected articles published between 2010 and 2021 labeled as older abstracts as well as
abstracts of up to 200 articles published since 2021 labeled as younger abstracts to the LLM. For
younger articles, I selected articles based on their citation rate. For clusters with more than 200 articles
published from 2021 this means I selected the 200 most impactful articles. The LLM was instructed to
identify emerging themes and methodological approaches as well as declining themes and
methodological approaches using the following prompt:
You are an expert in neuroscience and scientific text analysis.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

You are provided with a set of older neuroscientific abstracts and recent
neuroscientific abstracts that belong to the cluster '{title}'.
Your task is to compare older abstracts (pre-{year}) to recent abstracts
(post-{year}), focusing on:
Emerging thematic trends: New or increasingly emphasized topics (as well as
theories) that appear predominantly in the recent set.
Emerging methodological trends: New tools, techniques, or approaches
introduced or significantly gaining traction in the recent set.
Declining themes: Topics or themes that were prominent in the older set but
are less emphasized or absent in the recent set.
Declining methodological approaches: Tools, techniques, or approaches that
were commonly used in the older set but are now less represented or obsolete.
Provide your analysis in a structured JSON format.
**Output Format:**
Please present your findings in **JSON format** with the following structure:
{{
"Emerging Themes": "Semicolon separated list of emerging thematic trends with
brief descriptions",
"Emerging Methodological Approaches": "Semicolon separated list of emerging
methods or techniques with brief descriptions",
"Declining Themes": "Semicolon separated list of themes with brief
descriptions that are less emphasized or absent",
"Declining Methodological Approaches": "Semicolon separated list of older
methods or techniques with brief descriptions that are now less used"
}}
**Instructions:**
- **No colons**: Do not use colons in the JSON output.
- **Accuracy is crucial**: Ensure all information is directly supported by
the provided abstracts. Do not include information not present in the
abstracts or make external assumptions.
- **Clarity and Precision**: Assessments and descriptions should be clear and
accurately reflect the content of the abstracts.
- **Conciseness**: Do not include any additional text or explanations beyond
the specified JSON output. Do not generate more output than necessary.
**Here are the older abstracts**:
{old_abstracts}

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

**Here are the recent abstracts**:
{recent_abstracts}

To further understand developments within each cluster, I used the LLM to extract open questions for
each neuroscientific cluster. To that end I first obtained five full review articles per cluster in portable
document format (PDF). These review articles were published either in 2023 or 2024. Those published in
2023 were directly selected from the dataset based on their abstracts’ similarity to cluster centroid and
whether I had access. Candidates for review articles published in 2024 for each cluster were identified
by a PubMed query with the cluster’s keywords. Abstracts and digital object identifiers of the top 100
responses were obtained. Abstracts were then embedded and compared to the cluster centroid. Those
articles with the highest similarity to which I had access were selected. I included three articles from the
dataset (published in 2023) and two articles not in the dataset (published in 2024) unless access
limitations required adjustments to this distribution. The list of review articles I used is shown in
Supplementary Table 5. The set of five review articles of a cluster were then submitted to the LLM with
the instruction to identify the major open questions that are explicitly or implicitly discussed in these
articles defined in the following prompt:
You are a domain expert in neuroscience. You have the combined text of
several recent neuroscience review articles that all pertain to the same
cluster entitled "{cluster_title}".
{cluster_definition}
Your task is to synthesize and prioritize the major open questions explicitly
or implicitly mentioned in these articles.
Below are the texts (or substantial excerpts) of several review articles that
cover this cluster. Each article might mention multiple open questions,
challenges, or research gaps. Please read them carefully and produce a
consolidated list of the major open questions in this subdomain.
**Instructions:**
- Return your findings **only** in JSON format (valid JSON, no extra text).
- The JSON should contain a single field named `"Open Questions"`.
- Do **not** include any other text, explanations, or comments.
- Do **not** include more than five Open Questions.
- No lists: Provide the Open Questions as a single string separated by
semicolons, not as a list.
- Highlight overlap: Prioritize questions that appear in multiple reviews.
- Avoid fabrications: Only list questions that are actually stated or
strongly implied by the articles.
- Condense duplication: If multiple reviews mention the same open question,
merge them into a single entry.
- Preserve specificity: Include enough detail to capture the essence of each
open question.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

- Be concise: Keep each open question short (2 or 3 sentences) and simple.
Non-experts must be able to understand.
**Example Output:**
```json
{{
"Open Questions": "Open question 1; Open question 2; Open question 3"
}}

**Reviews:**
{reviews}

To synthesize overarching trends and key open questions that transcend individual research clusters, I
systematically aggregated the results obtained from cluster-specific analyses. Each cluster’s trends and
open questions were concatenated into a single document and submitted to the LLM with the
instruction to identify patterns that generalize across multiple clusters, distinguishing between emerging
research directions, methodological developments, and critical gaps in the field. I used the following
prompt:
You are an expert in neuroscience and scientific text analysis.
You are provided with a set of emerging trends and open questions in specific
neuroscience clusters.
Your task is to analyze the trends and questions in the clusters and provide
an overview of the 10 {type}s that transcend the clusters and reflect the
current state of neuroscience as a whole.
Any {type} may focus on thematic developments, methodological developments,
or both. For trends both negative and positive developments can be
interesting, but necessary developments should focus on which shortcomings
need to be addressed.
Provide your analysis in a structured JSON format.
**Output Format:**
Please present your findings in **JSON format** with the following structure:
{{
"{type} 1": Brief assessment and description of the first {type},
"{type} 2": Brief assessment and description of the second {type},
"{type} 3": Brief assessment and description of the third {type},
"{type} 4": Brief assessment and description of the fourth {type},
"{type} 5": Brief assessment and description of the fifth {type},

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

"{type} 6": Brief assessment and description of the sixth {type},
"{type} 7": Brief assessment and description of the seventh {type},
"{type} 8": Brief assessment and description of the eighth {type},
"{type} 9": Brief assessment and description of the ninth {type},
"{type} 10": Brief assessment and description of the tenth {type}
}}
**Instructions:**
- **Importance**: Focus on the most important {type}s that are relevant to
the field of neuroscience as a whole.
- **Big Picture View**: {type}s that only apply to a single or very small
number of cluster should not be included. Focus on {type}s that transcend the
clusters and reflect the broader field of neuroscience. A {type} that is
relevant to many clusters, though not necessarily all, should be included.
- **Accuracy is crucial**: Ensure all information is directly supported by
the provided text. Do not include information not present in the text or make
external assumptions.
- **Clarity and Precision**: Assessments and descriptions should be clear and
accurately reflect the content of the text.
- **Conciseness**: Do not include any additional text or explanations beyond
the specified JSON output. Do not generate more output than necessary.
**Here are the cluster specific trends and open questions**:
{text}

As can be appreciated from the prompt, the particular analysis the LLM should perform is variable. The
prompt was constructed in this way to enable separate analyses focusing on (1) overarching trends, (2)
necessary developments, and (3) transcendental research questions. In each case, the LLM was
prompted to generate exactly ten items that encapsulate broad, field-wide patterns rather than
localized trends specific to a single or small subset of clusters.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Data Availability
The data described in this study are available on Zenodo at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14865161

Code Availability
All code is available at https://github.com/ccnmaastricht/NeuroScape.git

Acknowledgments
I thank Arie H. van der Lugt and Gorka Zamora-Lopez for their helpful comments on earlier versions of
the manuscript.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Materials
Figures

Supplementary Figure 1: Average number of citations articles received as a function of their age for research (a) and review (b)
articles. Estimated from a sample of 10,000 randomly chosen articles of each type published between 1999 and 2019. Error bars
reflect standard error of measurement.

Tables
Supplementary Table 1: Overview of Neuroscience Domain Clusters.
This table presents a structured summary of the 175 research clusters identified through text embedding and clustering analysis
of neuroscientific literature from 1999 to 2023. Each cluster is characterized by a unique identifier, the number of articles it
contains, a descriptive title, and a detailed summary of its thematic content. The table also includes a set of relevant keywords
that capture the core topics and methodologies associated with each cluster.
Supplementary Table 2: Citation Network Metrics for Neuroscience Domain Clusters.
This table presents key network metrics describing the citation structure of each research cluster, including Krackhardt
coefficients for references and citations, in-degree (number of citing clusters), out-degree (number of referenced clusters),
betweenness centrality (a measure of a cluster’s role as a bridge in the citation network), and PageRank (an indicator of a
cluster’s relative influence based on citations from other influential clusters).
Supplementary Table 3: Characterization of Neuroscience Domain Clusters Across Key Dimensions.
This table provides a systematic classification of each research cluster along nine fundamental dimensions of neuroscientific
inquiry, including appliedness, modality, spatiotemporal scale, cognitive complexity, species studied, theory engagement, theory
scope, methodological approach, and interdisciplinarity. Note that spatiotemporal scales are divided into spatial and temporal
scales in the manuscript.
Supplementary Table 4: Emerging and Declining Trends in Neuroscience Domain Clusters.
This table summarizes the evolving thematic and methodological landscape within neuroscience research clusters. It highlights
emerging research themes and methodological approaches, as well as declining areas of focus. Additionally, key open questions
are listed for each cluster, reflecting unresolved scientific challenges and potential future research directions.
Supplementary table 5: Bibliography of Review Articles.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
1.

Brenner, S. & Sejnowski, T. J. Understanding the Human Brain. Science (1979) 334, 567–567
(2011).

2.

Craver, C. F. Explaining the Brain. (Oxford University Press, 2007).
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199299317.001.0001.

3.

DeFelipe, J. Sesquicentenary of the birthday of Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the father of modern
neuroscience. Trends Neurosci 25, 481–484 (2002).

4.

de Castro, F. Cajal and the Spanish Neurological School: Neuroscience Would Have Been a
Different Story Without Them. Front Cell Neurosci 13, (2019).

5.

Sherrington, C. S. et al. Reflex Activity of the Spinal Cord. (Oxford University Press (printed by
Lowe and Brydone), 1932).

6.

Morris, R. G. M. D.O. Hebb: The Organization of Behavior, Wiley: New York; 1949. Brain Res Bull
50, 437 (1999).

7.

Hubel, D. H. & Wiesel, T. N. Receptive fields of single neurones in the cat’s striate cortex. J Physiol
148, 574–591 (1959).

8.

Hubel, D. H. & Wiesel, T. N. Sequence regularity and geometry of orientation columns in the
monkey striate cortex. J Comp Neurol 158, 267–293 (1974).

9.

Hubel, D. H. & Wiesel, T. N. Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architecture in
the cat’s visual cortex. J Physiol 160, 106–154 (1962).

10.

Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M.-B. & Moser, E. I. Microstructure of a spatial map in
the entorhinal cortex. Nature 436, 801–806 (2005).

11.

Fyhn, M., Hafting, T., Treves, A., Moser, M.-B. & Moser, E. I. Hippocampal remapping and grid
realignment in entorhinal cortex. Nature 446, 190–194 (2007).

12.

Sargolini, F. et al. Conjunctive Representation of Position, Direction, and Velocity in Entorhinal
Cortex. Science (1979) 312, 758–762 (2006).

13.

Volberg, G., Chockley, A. S. & Greenlee, M. W. Do graphemes attract spatial attention in
grapheme-color synesthesia? Neuropsychologia 99, 101–111 (2017).

14.

Lacey, S., Martinez, M., McCormick, K. & Sathian, K. Synesthesia strengthens sound‐symbolic
cross‐modal correspondences. European Journal of Neuroscience 44, 2716–2721 (2016).

15.

KADOSH, R. & HENIK, A. Color Congruity Effect: Where do Colors and Numbers Interact in
Synesthesia? Cortex 42, 259–263 (2006).

16.

Nunn, J. A. et al. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of synesthesia: activation of V4/V8 by
spoken words. Nat Neurosci 5, 371–375 (2002).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

17.

Mazzocchi, F. Scientific research across and beyond disciplines. EMBO Rep 20, (2019).

18.

Andersen, H. Collaboration, interdisciplinarity, and the epistemology of contemporary science.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A 56, 1–10 (2016).

19.

Popper, K. Science: Conjectures and refutations, London and New York. Preprint at (1963).

20.

Popper, K. Realism and the Aim of Science. (Routledge, 1985). doi:10.4324/9780203713969.

21.

Yeung, A. W. K., Goto, T. K. & Leung, W. K. The Changing Landscape of Neuroscience Research,
2006–2015: A Bibliometric Study. Front Neurosci 11, (2017).

22.

SCImago. SJR — SCImago Journal & Country Rank. n.d.

23.

Traag, V. A., Waltman, L. & van Eck, N. J. From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected
communities. Sci Rep 9, 5233 (2019).

24.

Mondal, S. et al. COVID-19 pandemic and neurosciences in India–The coin study: Impact on
neuroscience research and early career researchers. J Neurol Sci 455, (2023).

25.

Samim, M. M. et al. COVID-19 pandemic &amp; neurosciences in India- the CoINstudy: Impact of
the pandemic on research related to the neurosciences. Indian Journal of Medical Research 159,
557 (2024).

26.

Schor, N. F., Cudkowicz, M. E. & Banwell, B. Academic Neurology and the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Neurology 100, 430–436 (2023).

27.

Krackhardt, D. & Stern, R. N. Informal networks and organizational crises: An experimental
simulation. Soc Psychol Q 123–140 (1988).

28.

Guilford, J. Psychometric Methods. (McGraw–Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, 1936).

29.

Barnett, L. & Seth, A. K. Dynamical independence: Discovering emergent macroscopic processes
in complex dynamical systems. Phys Rev E 108, 014304 (2023).

30.

Rosas, F. E. et al. Software in the natural world: A computational approach to hierarchical
emergence. (2024).

31.

Bjaalie, J. G. Understanding the brain through neuroinformatics. Front Neurosci 2, 19–21 (2008).

32.

Luo, N., Shi, W., Yang, Z., Song, M. & Jiang, T. Multimodal Fusion of Brain Imaging Data: Methods
and Applications. Machine Intelligence Research 21, 136–152 (2024).

33.

Wang, H.-T. et al. Finding the needle in a high-dimensional haystack: Canonical correlation
analysis for neuroscientists. Neuroimage 216, 116745 (2020).

34.

Pronold, J. et al. Multi-scale spiking network model of human cerebral cortex. Cerebral Cortex 34,
(2024).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.13.638094; this version posted February 14, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

35.

Schirner, M., McIntosh, A. R., Jirsa, V. K., Deco, G. & Ritter, P. Inferring multi-scale neural
mechanisms with brain network modelling. Elife (2017) doi:10.1101/157263.

36.

Lee, J., Kang, B. G., Kim, K. & Lee, K. M. Grokfast: Accelerated Grokking by Amplifying Slow
Gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20233 (2024).

37.

Traag, V. A., Van Dooren, P. & Nesterov, Y. Narrow scope for resolution-limit-free community
detection. Phys Rev E 84, 016114 (2011).

