bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Title Page
Characterising and Minimising Step and Filtering Artifacts in TMS-EEG Recordings
Marissa M. Holden1,2, Mitchell R. Goldsworthy1,2,3, Wei-Yeh Liao1, Scott R. Clark4, Christopher C.
Cline

,

, Corey J. Keller

,

,7

, Julio C. Hernandez-Pavon8, Nigel C. Rogasch1,2,9

1. School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health, Adelaide University
2. Hopwood Centre for Neurobiology, Lifelong Health Theme, South Australian Health and
Medical Research Institute
3. School of Psychology, College of Education, Behavioural and Social Sciences, Adelaide
University
4. School of Medicine, College of Health, Adelaide University
5. Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
6. Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
7. Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA
8. Department of Psychological Sciences, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA
9. School of Psychological Sciences and Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health, Monash
University, Australia.

Correspondence
Nigel C. Rogasch
Email: Nigel.rogasch@adelaide.edu.au

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Transcranial magnetic stimulation combined with electroencephalography (TMS-EEG)
enables direct measurement of cortical reactivity via TMS-evoked potentials (TEPs).
Interpretation of early TEP components however, is highly sensitive to stimulation and
hardware-related artifacts. We identified and characterised a persistent, non-neural ‘stepdrift’ artifact unexpectedly present in recent TMS-EEG recordings from our group. We show
that the artifact is distinct from previously described TMS pulse and discharge/decay artifacts
and likely reflects a hardware interaction phenomenon. We demonstrated that amplifier
settings, but not TMS pulse shape, substantially influenced artifact expression, with DCcoupled recordings with no online high-pass filter reducing step amplitude compared with
AC-coupled recordings with a high-pass filter. Simulations additionally revealed that filtering
over the step-drift artifact introduced pronounced ringing and edge artifacts, highlighting the
need to address this artifact prior to data processing. We propose a processing pipeline
incorporating robust polynomial detrending and a modified Butterworth filter with
autoregressive extrapolation that minimised TEP distortion in both simulated and real data
containing the step-drift artifact. Together, these findings provide practical recommendations
for both preventing and correcting step-drift artifacts and underscore the need for formal
definition and routine recognition of this artifact to improve reproducibility and data quality
in TMS-EEG research.
Keywords
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), Electroencephalography (EEG), TMS-evoked potentials
(TEPs), Artifacts, Filtering

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a non-invasive brain stimulation method which delivers a
brief magnetic pulse over the scalp, resulting in an electric field in the underlying cortex via
electromagnetic induction (Barker et al., 1985). At sufficient intensities, TMS causes depolarisation of
cortical neurons underneath the stimulating coil (Rothwell et al., 1991) and electroencephalography
(EEG) can capture the resulting cascade of neural activity which is measured as a series of TMSevoked potentials (TEPs) (Ilmoniemi et al., 1997). TEPs consist of positive and negative deflections at
distinct latencies and polarities, with the amplitude and latency of each peak thought to reflect
underlying neurophysiological processes both in the stimulated region and in broader neural networks
via transsynaptic neurotransmission (Bergmann et al., 2016; Farzan et al., 2016; Rogasch and
Fitzgerald, 2013; Siebner et al., 2009). In addition, TEPs also include sensory event-related potentials
(ERPs) caused by the clicking noise and sensation accompanying a TMS pulse (Biabani et al., 2024,
2019; Conde et al., 2019; Gordon et al., 2021; Nikouline et al., 1999; Rocchi et al., 2021). TEPs have
shown enormous potential both as a research tool to investigate healthy brain function and as a
clinically relevant biomarker for diagnosing brain disorders, assessing pharmacological effects on the
brain, and monitoring treatment responses (Tremblay et al., 2019; Ziemann et al., 2026).
Despite the growing interest in TEPs, TMS-EEG research is hampered by the presence of numerous
different artifacts which obscure the neural signal of interest (Hernandez-Pavon et al., 2022). Several
sources of artifact arise from interactions between the TMS pulse and the EEG recording system
during data acquisition, including: 1) a TMS pulse artifact caused by the electric current passing
through the TMS coil (Veniero et al., 2009); 2) a discharge/decay artifact caused by the dissipation of
capacitances stored at the gel-skin-electrode interface (Freche et al., 2018; Julkunen et al., 2008); and
3) a recharge artifact caused when the TMS capacitors recharge between pulses (Rogasch et al., 2013;
Veniero et al., 2009). Furthermore, additional artifacts arise following interaction between the TMS
pulse and off-target biological systems including: 1) TMS-evoked muscle artifacts resulting from
direct or indirect stimulation of craniofacial muscles by the TMS pulse (Hernandez-Pavon et al.,
2012; Mutanen et al., 2013; Rogasch et al., 2013); 2) blinks and eye-movements time-locked to the
TMS pulse (Bruckmann et al., 2012; Rogasch et al., 2014); and 3) neural activity in sensory and
salience networks caused by auditory and somatosensory input accompanying the TMS pulse
(Biabani et al., 2024, 2019; Conde et al., 2019; Gordon et al., 2021; Nikouline et al., 1999; Rocchi et
al., 2021). Together, these artifacts are well recognised within the TMS-EEG literature and have
guided the development of targeted online (i.e., during data acquisition) and offline (i.e., during data
processing) suppression methods such as dedicated acquisition methods and cleaning pipelines for
TMS-EEG data (Cline et al., 2021; Hernandez-Pavon et al., 2023, 2022; Ilmoniemi et al., 2015;
Rogasch et al., 2017). However, continued refinement of artifact characterisation and suppression
remain a central methodological priority to further improve TMS-EEG data quality.
One source of TMS-EEG artifact which has received relatively less interest is persistent offsets and
drifts in EEG voltage which can follow the TMS pulse. This ‘step-drift’ artifact presents as an offset
of up to 10 µV in amplitude following the TMS pulse which can last several seconds before slowly
drifting towards pre-stimulus amplitude levels and appears separate from discharge artifacts (Rogasch
et al., 2013). Throughout the manuscript, we refer to this artifact interchangeably as either the step or
step-drift artifact. The source of the step-drift artifact remains unclear. One possibility is that the
artifact may represent an interaction with online filters. Most TMS-compatible EEG systems operate
with either AC- or DC-coupled inputs prior to digitisation. AC coupling typically applies a high-pass
filter in the range of ~0.016–0.1 Hz to suppress slow drifts and maintain the signal within the optimal
dynamic range of the amplifier, but this comes with the risk of introducing additional spurious
trends/drifts in the signal. By comparison, DC coupling does not require a high-pass filter which
preserves slow signal components but carries an increased risk of baseline drift and amplifier clipping
(Hernandez-Pavon et al., 2023). Recording using DC-coupling without high-pass filtering is typically

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

recommended for TMS-EEG data collection (Hernandez-Pavon et al., 2023), however some studies
use a very low high-pass filter (e.g., 0.016 Hz) with AC-coupling (Bonato et al., 2006; Veniero et al.,
2009). Alternatively, the TMS pulse shape may also contribute. In DC-coupled EEG recordings made
from a melon to isolate non-biological artifacts, Rogasch and colleagues reported anecdotal evidence
that monophasic pulses from several different Magstim and MagVenture devices resulted in a
persistent offset which was less evident when using biphasic pulses (Rogasch et al., 2013). However,
systematic studies comparing the effect of different amplifier settings and pulse shapes on step
artifacts in humans have not been reported.
The presence of step-drift artifacts in TMS-EEG signals introduces additional artifacts during data
processing. For example, distinct electrical shapes within the EEG signal can yield characteristic
artifacts when processed through common filters. Sharp, step-like deflections and slow drift
components contain broad spectral content, meaning that when they pass through band-pass filters
they generate predictable distortions such as ringing, edge effects, and spurious oscillatory activity
(De Cheveigné and Nelken, 2019; Widmann et al., 2015). These distortions arise not from neural
activity but from the interaction between the non-sinusoidal shape of the artifact and the filter’s
impulse response (Tanner et al., 2016, 2015), highlighting the importance of understanding artifact
morphology when interpreting filtered TMS-EEG data. Importantly, processing pipelines with
specific steps which differ from standard TMS-EEG pipelines may be required to prevent additional
filter-related artifacts if step-drift artifacts are present in TMS-EEG data (de Cheveigné and
Arzounian, 2018).
In this study, we report data collected by our group in which step-drift artifacts were unexpectedly
identified, from which three primary aims were derived. First, we describe the presence of step-drift
artifacts in TMS-EEG recordings and use simulated data to characterise additional filtering artifacts
introduced by steps-drifts in TMS-EEG signals. Second, we investigate the impact of different
methodological choices during data collection on the size of step-drift artifacts, including different
pulse shapes (monophasic vs. biphasic) and online high-pass filter settings (AC-coupled vs. DCcoupled). Third, we assess different combinations of data processing methods to determine the
optimal steps for mitigating filtering artifacts when TMS-EEG data contain step artifacts. In the first
stage of this analysis, we use simulated data with a known ground truth to evaluate the efficacy of
different temporal filter and detrending combinations on minimising filtering artifacts. We then
compare the optimal processing pipeline we identified to another common pipeline using real TMSEEG data with step artifacts to assess the impact of pipeline choice on TEPs.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Methods
Participants
Sixteen healthy adults were recruited via university email lists and flyers to participate in an unrelated
study investigating the effect of coil positioning and auditory masking methods on TEPs (experiment
1). One participant withdrew due to discomfort associated with auditory masking, yielding a final
sample of fifteen participants (11 females; mean age = 30.3 ± 7.6 years, range = 23-47 years). After
noticing the step artifact in the data set and determining an incorrect amplifier configuration was used
for data collection (see experiment 1 details), four participants returned to participate in an additional
experiment to assess the impact of amplifier settings and pulse shape on step artifacts (experiment 2),
and two participants completed another experiment assessing the impact of amplifier range settings on
clipping artifacts (experiment 3). All participants provided written informed consent to procedures
approved by The University of Adelaide Human Research Ethics Committee (H-2019-220) and
experiments were performed in accordance with the National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human
Research from the National Health and Medical Research Council (2018). Inclusion criteria required
no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders and no current psychiatric medications. Standard
safety screening was conducted to exclude any contraindications to MRI or TMS (e.g., metal
implants, history of seizures).
Experimental procedures
MRI: All participants underwent a T1-weighted MRI scan prior to TMS-EEG sessions for use in
neuronavigation of the TMS coil (3T Siemens Magnetom Cima.X; MPRAGE, TA: 5.12 min, TR:
2300 ms, TE: 2.9 ms, TI: 900 ms, voxel size: 1 mm3, flip angle: 8, slices: 192). T1-weighted images
underwent cortical surface reconstruction using FreeSurfer's recon-all pipeline (Fischl, 2012).
Brodmann area 8 was identified on each participant's cortical surface by mapping the Brodmann atlas
(Pijnenburg et al., 2021) to individual anatomy using FreeSurfer's mris_ca_label function. The
resulting annotations were converted to individual labels for each hemisphere and subsequently
transformed into a volume in native space using mri_label2vol for display in the neuronavigation
software.
Experiment 1 - Prefrontal TMS-EEG with Optimised Coil Positioning and Auditory Masking:
Participants completed 6 different conditions designed to assess variations in coil positioning and
auditory masking methods on TEPs following stimulation of prefrontal cortex, the details and results
of which will be reported elsewhere. For the current study, data from 1 of these conditions were
analysed. Transcranial magnetic stimulation was delivered using a figure-of-eight coil connected to a
Magstim200 stimulator. Resting motor threshold (RMT) was determined individually for each
participant by stimulating the left primary motor cortex and identifying the minimum intensity that
elicited motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) greater than 0.05 mV in the right first dorsal interosseous
(FDI) muscle recorded via surface electromyography, in at least 5 out of 10 consecutive trials (Rossini
et al., 1994). Coil orientation during motor hotspotting was maintained at approximately 45° relative
to the mid-sagittal plane. Pulses were monophasic with current direction running posterior-anterior
(PA) in the underlying cortex. For TMS-EEG data collection, the TMS coil position was set to target
Brodmann Area 8 in the left hemisphere corresponding to superior frontal gyrus. Neuronavigation
was used to track coil position in relation to the underlying cortex (BrainSightTM, Rogue Resolutions).
Coil position and angle were further optimised to maximise the amplitude of the P20/N40 TEP and
minimise TMS-evoked muscle artifact using a customised optimisation process which included online
feedback collected with the rt-TEP toolbox (Casarotto et al., 2022) and custom MATLAB scripts. A
grid of four stimulation sites separated by ~10 mm was placed within BA8 and 15 pulses was
collected at different coil angles (60˚, 90˚, 120˚ to the midline) from each site. TMS intensity was set
to 120% of each participant’s RMT adjusted for coil-to-cortex distance at each individual site (Stokes

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

et al., 2005). The site/angle with no/ minimal muscle artifact and the largest peak-to-peak P20/N40
TEP amplitude was selected as the site for stimulation.
EEG was recorded using a 64-channel cap (multitrode electrode for TMS, EasyCap GmbH) connected
to a TMS-compatible amplifier (BrainAmp MR Plus, Brain Products GmbH). Electrodes were
positioned according to the international 10–20 system. A ground electrode was placed on the
forehead, with a reference electrode positioned adjacent to it. Impedances for all electrodes were kept
below 10 kΩ prior to recording and stimulation. EEG data were sampled at 5,000 Hz. Although our
group typically use DC-coupling for TMS-EEG experiments (Biabani et al., 2024, 2019), we
mistakenly used a configuration file with default amplifier settings including AC-coupling (online
filters = 0.016-1000 Hz; range = ± 3.28 mV). 120 TMS pulses were delivered (ISI = 5 s; 4-6 s jitter)
with participants sitting at rest with eyes open during data collection.
During recording, masking noise was continuously played to participants using in-ear earphones
covered by ear defenders to minimise perception of the TMS click sound. A customised auditory
masking sound was generated for each participant using the TAAC toolbox prior to data collection
(Russo et al., 2022). The relevant contribution of white noise and click-based noise was varied until
the optimal combination to minimise click perception was identified for each participant and used
throughout data collection.
Experiment 2- Effects of Pulse Waveform and Amplifier Coupling on TMS-EEG Artifacts: The
experimental arrangement was identical to experiment 1. Participants completed 4 conditions to test
the impact of pulse type (monophasic vs biphasic) and amplifier settings (AC-coupling with high-pass
filter [0.016-1000 Hz] vs DC-coupling with no high-pass filter [DC-1000 Hz]) on the presence of step
artifacts. Combinations included: 1) monophasic pulses + AC-coupling; monophasic pulses + DCcoupling; biphasic pulses + AC-coupling; biphasic pulses + DC-coupling. For the biphasic condition,
the TMS coil was connected to a Magstim Rapid2 using a connector. Current direction was PA-AP in
the underlying cortex.
Experiment 3 - Impact of Amplifier Dynamic Range on Clipping in DC-Coupled TMS-EEG: The
experimental arrangement was again identical to experiment 1, except DC-coupling with no high-pass
filter was used for the amplifier setting. Participants completed 2 conditions to test the impact of
amplifier range settings on clipping artifacts when using DC-coupling. One condition used the
standard amplifier range (± 3.28 mV) while a second condition used an extended range (± 16.38 mV),
acknowledging the trade-off that increasing the dynamic range reduces the effective digitization
resolution and therefore may diminish signal fidelity for low-amplitude fluctuations.
Artifact examples
First, we provided an example of step, drift and filtering (i.e., ringing) artifacts observed in an
individual participant from experiment 1. Data were analysed using EEGLAB (Delorme and Makeig,
2004) and TESA (v1.1.1) (Rogasch et al., 2017) in MATLAB (MathWorks Inc.) using a minimal
processing pipeline (supplementary methods pipeline 1). Both the global mean field amplitude
(GMFA; the standard deviation of EEG amplitude across channels at each timepoint) and a butterfly
plot showing all channels were plotted. To help demonstrate the temporal and spatial characteristics of
the step-drift artifact, FastICA (Hyvärinen and Oja, 2000) was run on the data and the independent
component representing the step-drift artifact (IC1) was selected and plotted. We then applied a bandpass Butterworth filter (1-80 Hz, second order) to the data to demonstrate additional ringing and edge
artifacts introduced by filtering over the step and drift artifacts.
To further demonstrate the interaction between the different sources of artifact and offline filters, we
simulated a step artifact by generating a flat line (amplitude = 0 µV) equivalent in length to our EEG
epochs (-1000 to 1000 ms) and then added a constant value (amplitude = 5 µV) to the post-stimulus
window (0 to 1000 ms). We then separately applied a high-pass (1 Hz, second order) and low-pass (80

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Hz, second order) Butterworth filter to the simulated data and plotted the outcomes. We repeated the
analysis on data with a simulated drift artifact to compare outcomes (linear drift rate = -5 µV/s;
starting amplitude = 5 µV).

Testing experimental arrangements to minimise step artifacts (online)
To assess the impact of online methods (AC- vs. DC-coupling; monophasic vs. biphasic pulse shapes)
on artifacts in data from experiment 2, we used a minimal data cleaning pipeline implemented with
EEGLAB and TESA (supplementary methods pipeline 2). Step artifact amplitudes were quantified by
measuring the mean of the GMFA between 50 to 500 ms (starting value chosen to avoid any large
transients in the data following the TMS pulse). To assess the impact of offline filtering on the data,
we also applied a second-order Butterworth band-pass filter (1-80 Hz) using the pop_tesa_filtbutter.m
function. Ringing artifacts were quantified by measuring the mean GMFA between -100 to -2 ms
(e.g., before the TMS pulse as ringing artifacts are introduced before and after step artifacts due to
zero-phase filter). Due to the low sample size (n=4), the dependent variables were grouped into either
AC-coupling and DC-coupling conditions, or monophasic and biphasic conditions and compared
using a two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test (α = 0.05) with two contrasts: AC- vs. DC-coupling; and
mono- vs. biphasic pulse shape.

Developing and testing cleaning pipelines to minimise filtering artifacts (offline)
Function development: To assess whether we could minimise filtering artifacts resulting from step
artifacts during offline data cleaning we developed four new functions for the TESA toolbox: 1)
pop_tesa_robustdemean.m which calculates the robust mean (i.e., excluding values outside a defined
SD range) within a given data range and then subtracts this value from all data points within the range
(e.g., fits and removes an offset from the signal). 2) pop_tesa_robustdetrend.m which calculates a
robust best fitting polynomial of degree n within a given data range and then subtracts this polynomial
from data points within the range (e.g., fits and removes drifts in the signal). 3)
pop_tesa_modifiedbandpassfilter.m which was based on methods developed in the AARATEP
toolbox to avoid ringing artifacts caused by high-pass filtering over large steps in the data (Cline et
al., 2021). This function uses autoregressive extrapolation to artificially extend the time series forward
from the start of the TMS-pulse removal window and backwards from the end of the window (e.g., by
500 ms), thereby extending and smoothing the ‘edge’ of the data. Butterworth filters are then applied
separately to the extended pre- and post-data periods and the filtered data is blended back together
using sigmoidal weightings over the removal window. 4) pop_tesa_interactivechanreject.m which
generates an interactive figure for manually checking bad channels by visualising a TEP butterfly
plot. Individual channels can be manually selected and removed.
Simulated data tests: To compare the efficacy of different combinations of detrending and filtering for
removing the step artifact and preventing filtering artifacts, we generated simulated TMS-EEG data.
First, we generated an ‘absolute ground truth’ TEP by adding together two damped oscillations: a beta
oscillation (frequency = 25 Hz; decay constant = 0.1 s; no. cycles = 1.5; starting phase = 270 degrees;
amplitude = 5 µV; onset = 10 ms) and a theta oscillation (frequency = 5 Hz; decay constant = 0.1 s;
no. cycles = 1.5; starting phase = 90 degrees; amplitude = 3 µV; onset = 60 ms). The time series was
then smoothed using a low-pass Butterworth filter (40 Hz, second order). The simulated TEP showed
characteristics of prefrontal TEPs including peaks at P20, N45, P65, N120 and P200. We then
extracted baseline data (i.e., before the TMS pulse) from the F1 channel of real TMS-EEG data
collected in our experiments (n=15; -3500 ms to -500 ms; 120 trials), inserted artificial TMS triggers
at the mid-point of the extracted period, epoched around the artificial triggers (-1500 to 1500 ms) and
baseline corrected the data (-500 to -10 ms). Next, we added our ‘absolute ground truth’ TEP to each

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

trial so the onset coincided with timepoint 0 (i.e., the centre of the epoch), and then removed and
interpolated data around the artificial TMS trigger (-2 to 10 ms; cubic interpolation). Finally, we
created five conditions with artificial step artifacts between 2 and 10 µV in amplitude (2 µV
increments) by adding constant values to the post TMS data points.
We then assessed how different combinations of cleaning methods impacted our simulated TEPs with
different step artifact amplitudes. Robust demeaning and detrending (polynomial order = 1) were
applied separately on the pre (-1500 to -2 ms) and post (10 to 1499 ms) TMS periods. A standard
high-pass Butterworth filter (1 Hz, second order), and a modified high-pass Butterworth filter (1 Hz,
fourth order, autoregressive extension = 900 ms) were also used. In total, 8 combinations of methods
were tested including:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

robust demean;
robust detrend;
standard Butterworth filter;
modified Butterworth filter with autoregressive extrapolation;
robust demean + Butterworth filter;
robust detrend + Butterworth filter;
robust demean + modified Butterworth filter;
robust detrend + modified Butterworth filter.

We first quantified the impact of increasing step artifact amplitude on TEP distortion by calculating
the root mean square error (RMSE; from 10 to 300 ms) between simulated TEPs with no step artifact
following cleaning compared to those with increasing step amplitudes. Next, we compared how well
each method retrieved the ‘absolute ground truth’ TEP by calculating the RMSE between each
cleaning combination and the ground truth (between 10 to 50 ms). Cleaning combinations were then
ranked from highest to lowest RMSE. The approach was repeated for the 0 and 10 µV step artifact
conditions and the cleaning combination with the lowest RMSE in the 10 µV step artifact condition
chosen as the optimal pipeline. To assess how these cleaning approaches performed in the presence of
other non-linear artifacts common in TMS-EEG data, we repeated the above analyses introducing a
decay/discharge artifact at timepoint 0 for the 0 and 10 µV step artifact conditions. Decay/discharge
artifacts were simulated as decay following a second-order power law (duration = 500 ms; scaling
coefficient = 0.005 µV.s2; exponent = 2).
Real data tests: Having established the optimal cleaning pipeline for minimising step and ringing
artifacts in simulated data, we then compared this modified pipeline to a standard cleaning pipeline in
real data from experiments 1 and 2. The standard and modified pipelines are summarised in table 1.
The standard pipeline consisted of the following. First, we removed and interpolated data around the
TMS pulse in the continuous recordings (-2 to 10 ms; cubic interpolation) and resampled the data
(1000 Hz). Channels showing flat lines longer than 4 s were removed, data were epoched around the
TMS pulse (-1000 to 1000 ms) and baseline corrected (-500 to -10 ms), and epochs with values >3 SD
either across a single channel or across all channels were removed. Any missing channels were then
replaced using spherical interpolation and the data were referenced to the average of all channels.
Butterfly plots of TEPs were manually checked at this point and bad channels were identified and
removed using pop_tesa_interactivechanreject.m. Next, interpolated data and channels were removed
prior to FastICA and independent components representing TMS-evoked muscle activity were
automatically detected and removed using the default values of the pop_tesa_compselect.m function.
Removed data and channels were interpolated and Butterworth band-pass (1-80 Hz, second order) and
band-stop (48-52 Hz, second order) filters were applied. Interpolated data and channels were again
removed prior to a second round of FastICA and independent components representing residual TMSevoked muscle activity, blinks, eye movement and ongoing muscle activity were automatically
detected and removed using the default values of the pop_tesa_compselect.m function. Finally,

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

removed data were interpolated and the data were again referenced to the average of all channels. The
modified pipeline was identical to the standard pipeline except the band-pass and notch filtering steps
were replaced by: 1) a robust detrend (degree = 1; equivalent to a linear detrend) performed
separately on the pre (-1000 to -2 ms) and post (10 to 999 ms) time windows; 2) cubic interpolation of
the TMS-pulse removal window; 3) a modified high-pass Butterworth filter with autoregressive
extrapolation (1 Hz, fourth order, extension = 900 ms); 4) a standard low-pass filter (80 Hz, second
order); and 5) a modified notch filter (48-52 Hz, fourth order, extension = 900 ms). We chose a
modified notch filter as we observed additional ringing artifacts associated with the standard
Butterworth filter in testing (supplementary figure S1).
Table 1: summary of the standard and modified processing pipelines. The modified pipeline was
identical to the standard pipeline except at steps 15a-e.
Step
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15a
15b

Standard pipeline
Remove TMS pulse (-2 to 10 ms).
Interpolate missing data (cubic).
Downsample (1,000 Hz).
Remove channels with flat lines.
Epoch (-1000 to 1000 ms).
Baseline correct (-500 to -10 ms).
Remove epochs >3 SD in amplitude
Replace missing channels (spherical
interpoloation).
Re-reference to average of all channels.
Manually check removed channels.
Remove interpolated data.
FastICA.
Automatically remove components
representing TMS-evoked muscle activity.
Interpolate missing data.
Butterworth band-pass filter (1-80 Hz,
second order)
Butterworth band-stop filter (48-52 Hz,
second order).

15c

15e

19
20

Robust detrend (degree = 1) on pre and
post TMS periods separately.
Interpolate missing data (cubic).
Modified high-pass Butterworth filter with
autoregressive extrapolation (1 Hz, fourth
order, extension = 900 ms).
Standard low-pass filter (80 Hz, second
order)
Modified Butterworth band-stop filter (4852 Hz, fourth order, extension = 900 ms).

15d

16
17
18

Modified pipeline

Remove interpolated data.
FastICA.
Automatically remove components
representing TMS-evoked muscle, eye
blinks, eye movement, ongoing muscle
activity.
Interpolate missing data
Re-reference to average.

To assess the impact of cleaning pipelines on ringing artifacts in data with and without step artifacts
(experiment 2), we calculated the GMFA in the baseline period before the TMS pulse (-100 to -2 ms)
to quantify the ringing artifact in the AC- (step present) vs DC-coupling (step absent) dataset (n=4).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

We then grouped and compared ringing artifact amplitudes across four separate contrasts using twosided Wilcoxon rank sum tests (α = 0.05): data with step vs. no-step using the standard pipeline; data
with step vs. no-step using the modified pipeline; standard vs. modified pipeline in data with step
artifacts; and standard vs. modified pipeline in data without step artifacts. To assess the impact of step
artifacts and cleaning pipelines on TEP spatiotemporal characteristics, we compared TEP amplitudes
in the original dataset (n=15; AC-coupling with step artifacts; experiment 1) cleaned with the standard
vs. modified pipeline using cluster-based permutation statistics in FieldTrip (Oostenveld et al., 2011).
Six separate time windows were assessed covering canonical TEP peaks and EEG amplitudes were
average across time within each window: baseline (-110 to -90 ms); P20 (36 to 55 ms); N45 (56 to 75
ms); N120 (110 to 130 ms); and P220 (210 to 230 ms). Clusters were defined as two or more
neighbouring electrodes in which the t-statistic exceeded a threshold of p < 0.05 (two-sided dependent
t-test). The test statistics were calculated as the maximum of the cluster-level statistics (i.e.,
“maxsum”). Monte Carlo p-values were calculated on 5000 random permutations and a value of p <
0.05 (2-tailed) was used as a cluster significance threshold.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Results
Step, drift, and filtering artifacts
Figure 1A shows an example of step-drift artifacts in TMS-EEG data for an individual participant
from experiment 1 (online settings: sampling rate = 5 kHz, AC-coupled filters, 0.016-1000 Hz). EEG
amplitudes are offset immediately following the TMS pulse and do not return to baseline (average of
120 trials, epoched and baseline corrected with the pulse artifact between -2 to 10 ms removed, then
re-referenced to average. F1 channel is highlighted). The step artifact offset is clearly visible in the
GMFA (figure 1B). The step artifact is captured by the first independent component (figure 1C),
which shows the step in the data after the pulse followed by a slow drift. The offset is largest in
channels near the stimulation site (left frontal channels near F1) and can change polarity across
different scalp locations. Figures 1D-E shows the TEP and GMFA following band-pass filtering
(second order Butterworth filter; 1-80 Hz). Although the offset of the step artifact is mostly removed,
distortions are still present immediately before and after TMS pulse (known as ‘ringing’ artifacts) and
at the start and end of the epoch (known as ‘edge’ artifacts). Note that ringing artifacts occur both
before and after the pulse artifact due to the zero-phase design of acausal filters which run both
forwards and backwards through the data to prevent phase offsets. Edge artifacts occur due to steps in
the data introduced by zero-padding at the epoch boundaries. The ringing and edge artifacts following
filtering of the step-drift artifact are clearly represented in the first IC (figure 1F).

Figure 1: Step, drift, and filtering artifacts in TMS-EEG data. A) Butterfly plot of minimallyprocessed EEG data (epoched, baseline corrected, and average referenced) following a TMS pulse
with a step artifact. A channel near the stimulation site (F1) is highlighted in red. Timing of the TMS
pulse is indicated by grey dashed line. B) Global mean field amplitude (GMFA) of minimallyprocessed TEPs with a step artifact. C) Temporal (line plot) and spatial (inset topoplot) weightings of
the first independent component (IC) representing the step and drift artifact. D) Same data as in A
following 1-80 Hz band-pass filtering (second order Butterworth filter). E) Same data as in B
following 1-80 Hz band-pass filtering (second order Butterworth filter). F) Same IC as in C following
1-80 Hz band-pass filtering.
To demonstrate the interaction between artifacts and temporal filters, we simulated a constant signal
(amplitude = 0 µV) with either a step (amplitude = 5 µV; 0-1000 ms), or a drift (linear drift rate = -5
µV/s; starting amplitude = 5 µV), and then applied high- and low-pass Butterworth filters (second

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

order) separately to the simulated data (figure 2). These analyses show that high-pass filters result in
the positive/negative ringing artifacts before/after the step in the data, whereas the edge artifacts are
introduced following high-pass filtering over drifts in the data. In contrast, low-pass filters have
minimal impact on the data in the presence of either step or drift artifacts. Together, these analyses
show that the presence of a step-drift artifact in TMS-EEG data can lead to additional filtering-related
artifacts following high-pass and, by extension, band-pass filtering.

Figure 2: The effect of filtering over simulated steps and drifts. The impact of second order
Butterworth filters on constant data with a step artifact (A, 1 Hz high-pass; B, 80 Hz low-pass) and a
drift artifact (C, 1 Hz high-pass; D, 80 Hz low-pass).

Online methods for minimising step artifacts
Pulse shape and online filters: Having established that the presence of step-drift artifacts can lead to
additional artifacts following common filtering steps, we next assessed the impact of different online
methodological choices on the amplitude of step-drift artifacts in TMS-EEG data. To assess whether
the choice of online high-pass filter setting (AC-coupling with 0.016 Hz high-pass filter vs. DCcoupling with no high-pass filter) or the type of pulse shape (monophasic vs. biphasic) altered stepamplitude artifact, we compared minimally processed data from 4 participants across 4 conditions.
When comparing GMFA between conditions, the post-TMS offset was larger when using AC- vs.
DC-coupling (p < 0.001), but did not differ between monophasic and biphasic pulse shapes (p =
0.574; figure 3A-C). In addition, after applying a band-pass filter (1-80 Hz, Butterworth, order = 2),
ringing artifacts were evident before the TMS pulse (introduced by zero-phase filter; see figure 2) and
were larger with AC-coupling vs DC-coupling (p = 0.007), but did not differ between monophasic and
biphasic pulses (p = 0.574; figure D-F). Together, these findings suggest that using DC-coupling with
no online high-pass filters can minimise both the step artifact and subsequent ringing artifacts
introduced by offline high-pass filters compared to AC-coupling with online high-pass filtering.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: The effect of amplifier settings and TMS pulse shape on step and ringing artifacts. A)
TMS-evoked potentials (TEPs) from the F3 channel averaged across participants for each condition
before filtering. B) Global mean field amplitude (GMFA) averaged across participants for each
condition before filtering. The grey bar represents the analysis period for quantifying the step artifact
(50 to 500 ms). C) Step artifacts across different experimental arrangements. Lines represent values
from individual participants, bars represent the group mean. D) TEPs averaged across participants for
each condition after band-pass Butterworth filtering (1-80 Hz, second order). E) GMFA averaged
across participants for each condition after band-pass Butterworth filtering (1-80 Hz, second order).
The grey bar represents the analysis period for quantifying the filtering artifact (-100 to -2 ms). F)
Ringing artifacts across different experimental conditions. Mono = monophasic TMS pulses; bi =
biphasic TMS pulses; AC = alternating current-coupled amplifier (high-pass filter = 0.016 Hz); DC =
direct current-coupled amplifier (no high-pass filter).

Clipping: During experiment 2, we noticed a number of channels ‘clipped’ (e.g., moved outside of the
operating range) (figure 4A). Instances of clipping were considerably higher in conditions using DCcoupling, particularly with monophasic pulses (figure 4B), and instances tended to increase over the
duration of the recording condition (supplementary figure S2). Increasing the amplifier range from ±
3.28 mV to ± 16.38 mV reduced the instances of clipping during DC-coupled recordings for both
monophasic and biphasic pulses (figure 4C), with only one channel exceeding the amplifier range
across the two participants and four conditions tested (supplementary figure S3). In summary, these
findings suggest caution is required using DC-coupling due to the increased risk of channels drifting
outside of the amplifier recording range. However, using a larger amplifier range when collecting
TMS-EEG data with DC-coupling can mitigate data lost to clipping.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: ‘Clipping’ artifacts in TMS-EEG recordings. A) An example of an EEG channel that
drifts outside of the amplifier recording range indicated by red dashed lines (i.e. ‘clips). The recording
was made using DC-coupling (i.e., no online high-pass filter). Note that TMS pulses were removed
and interpolated for visualisation. B) Percentage of samples outside of the amplifier recording range
across all channels for each condition. Lines represent values from individual participants, bars
represent the group mean. Mono = monophasic TMS pulses; bi = biphasic TMS pulses; AC =
alternating current-coupled amplifier (high-pass filter = 0.016 Hz); DC = direct current-coupled
amplifier (no high-pass filter). C) Percentage of samples outside the recording range. Lines represent
values from individual participants (high = ± 16.38 mV low = ± 3.28 mV).

Offline methods for minimising filtering artifacts
Simulations: To assess the impact of high-pass filtering on TEPs with step artifacts, we applied a 1 Hz
high-pass filter (second order Butterworth) to a simulated TEP mixed with real EEG data (n=15) and
introduced simulated step artifacts of varying amplitude (figure 5A-B). Compared to no step artifact,
increasing step amplitude resulted in increasing ringing artifact distortions in both the pre-stimulus
and post-stimulus windows following a standard Butterworth filter (figure 5B-C). We then assessed
whether using either robust demeaning or robust detrending to the pre and post TMS time window
separately prior to filtering improved filter outcome. Using either method removed the distortion with
increasing step amplitude (figure 5C-D). We also assessed whether using a modified Butterworth
filter which uses autoregression to artificially extend the pre and post TMS windows prior to filtering
improved filter outcomes. The distortion with increasing step amplitude was reduced using the
modified Butterworth filter relative to a standard Butterworth filter, but was optimal when either
robust demeaning or detrending were applied as well (figure 5E-F).

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. The impact of different pre-processing methods on ringing artifacts with increasing
step artifact amplitude. A) Simulated TEPs embedded in real EEG data with differing simulated step
artifact amplitudes. Solid line indicates group mean and shaded lines indicate standard error (n=15).
B) Simulated TEPs following high-pass Butterworth filter (1 Hz, second order). Ringing artifacts are
evident before and after the simulated TMS pulse and increase with increasing step artifact amplitude.
The grey bar represents the time period used to compare root mean square error between conditions.
C) The impact of including either robust demeaning or robust detrending prior to Butterworth filter on
ringing artifacts with increasing step artifact amplitude. TEP distortion is quantified by calculating the
root-mean square error with the filtered TEP with no step artifact. Note that Demean + Butter and
Detrend + Butter are overlapping. D) Simulated TEPs following robust detrending and a high-pass
Butterworth filter. Ringing artifacts are no longer evident with increasing step artifact amplitude. E)
The impact of using a modified Butterworth filter with autoregressive extrapolation on ringing

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

artifacts with increasing step artifact amplitude. Note that Demean + Butter and Detrend + Butter are
overlapping. F) Simulated TEPs following robust detrending and a modified high-pass Butterworth
filter.

To determine which combination of pre-processing methods best recovered the simulated TEP, we
calculated RMSE relative to the absolute ground truth TEP (10 to 50 ms) following 8 different
combinations of filters and detrending methods for both no step artifact and a 10 µV step artifact. We
then sorted methods based on largest to smallest RMSE. For both cases, pre-processing generally
reduced RMSE relative to raw data. However, the combination of robust demeaning/detrending and
the modified Butterworth filter resulted in the smallest RMSE both with and without a step artifact
(figure 6), indicating this combination is optimal for reducing drifts in the signal regardless of the
presence of steps.

Figure 6: The impact of different cleaning combinations on recovering the ground truth TEP.
A) Root mean square error (RMSE) between the ground truth TEP and cleaned simulated TEPs
embedded in real EEG data with no step artifact for 8 different combinations of detrending and
filtering. Bars represent the group mean and error bars the standard error of the mean (n=15).
Cleaning combinations are ranked from highest to lowest RMSE. B) RMSE between the ground truth
TEP and cleaned simulated TEPs embedded in real EEG data with 10 µV step artifact for 8 different
combinations of detrending and filtering. C) Comparison of simulated TEPs embedded in real EEG
data with no step artifact including raw data, data following Butterworth filtering, and the optimal
cleaning combination (detrend + modified filter) vs. ground truth TEP. Solid lines represent group

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

mean and shaded bars represent standard error. The grey bar indicates the time period in which RMSE
was calculated. D) Comparison of simulated TEPs embedded in real EEG data with 10 µV step
artifact including raw data, data following Butterworth filtering, and the optimal cleaning combination
(detrend + modified filter) vs. ground truth TEP.

To assess how robust detrending and the modified filter performed in the presence of non-linear
artifacts common in TMS-EEG recordings, we repeated the above analysis on simulated data
including a discharge/decay artifact introduced at timepoint 0. The differences in RMSE between
standard Butterworth filters and the optimal cleaning combination (detrend + modified filter) were
similar with a discharge/decay artifact to without (supplementary figure S4), suggesting this approach
is unaffected by non-linear artifacts. In summary, the combination of robust detrending and a
modified band-pass filter with autoregressive interpolation appears optimal for reducing filtering
artifacts in TMS-EEG data containing step artifacts regardless of the presence of other artifacts.

Comparison of cleaning pipelines: The results of the simulation analysis suggested that a combination
of robust detrending and a modified Butterworth filter were optimal to minimise offline filtering
artifacts if step artifacts were present in TMS-EEG data. To test this, we assessed whether a cleaning
pipeline using the modified detrend/filtering approach was able to minimise artifacts compared with a
standard cleaning pipeline in real TMS-EEG data (AC/DC-coupling data; experiment 2). As in the
earlier analysis, ringing artifacts were larger in data collected with AC-coupling (i.e., with a step
artifact) vs. DC-coupling (i.e., without a step artifact) using the standard pipeline (p = 0.003), but did
not differ between conditions when using the modified pipeline (p = 0.645; figure 7). When directly
comparing the pipelines in the data collected with AC-coupling, the modified pipeline reduced the
amplitude of the ringing artifact compared with the standard pipeline (p = 0.005). In contrast, there
was no difference when comparing pipelines in data collected with DC-coupling (p = 0.505). In
summary, these analyses suggest that the modified cleaning pipeline is able to both suppress the step
artifact and reduce subsequent ringing artifacts caused by offline filtering, resulting in TEPs that are
similar to those collected without a step artifact.

Figure 7: Comparison of a standard and modified cleaning pipeline for minimising ringing
artifacts in data with and without step artifacts. A-D) TMS-evoked potential (TEP) amplitude
from data following standard and modified cleaning pipelines across different experimental settings.
Solid lines represent group means (n=4). E-H) Global mean field amplitude (GMFA) from data
following standard and modified cleaning pipelines across different experimental settings. The grey

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

bar represents the analysis period for quantifying the filtering artifact (-100 to -2 ms). I) Ringing
artifact amplitude from GMFA data following standard and modified cleaning pipelines across
different experimental settings. Bars represent group means and lines represent values from individual
participants.

Finally, we assessed the generalisability of this approach by comparing the standard vs. modified
cleaning pipeline in a larger group of participants using a sub-optimal recording arrangement resulting
in step artifacts (n=15; experiment 1). The modified cleaning pipeline resulted in substantial
differences in the amplitude and spatial distribution of canonical prefrontal TEPs compared to the
standard pipeline, including the P20 (p < 0.001), N45 (p < 0.001), P65 (p < 0.001), N120 (p < 0.001)
and P220 (p = 0.004), as well as during baseline (p < 0.001) (figure 8). These findings demonstrate
that standard Butterworth filters can introduce ringing artifacts that substantially alter the
spatiotemporal properties of TEPs, especially in data with steps or offsets. Importantly, these artifacts
can be minimised by using pipelines which separately detrend the pre and post data prior to filtering,
and that use modified filters which take into account edges resulting from removal of the TMS pulse
artifact.

Figure 8: Comparison of TEPs following a standard and modified cleaning pipeline in data with
a step artifact. A) TMS-evoked potential (TEP) data from a single channel near the site of
stimulation (F1) following a standard and modified cleaning pipeline in data with a step artifact. Solid
lines represent group mean (n = 15) and shaded bars represent standard error of the mean. B) Global
mean field amplitude (GMFA) of TMS-EEG data with a step artifact following a standard and
modified cleaning pipeline. C) Topoplots showing statistical maps comparing TEPs following
standard vs. modified cleaning pipelines. Colours represent t-values and asterisks channels
contributing to significant clusters following cluster-based permutation tests (p<0.05).

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Discussion
Artifacts are an enduring problem in TMS-EEG recordings. In the current study, we show
that TMS-evoked activity can be distorted by a persistent non-neural artifact, appearing as a
sudden post-TMS voltage step followed by a slow drift in EEG amplitude. Using offline
filters on data containing the ‘step’ and ‘drift’ components introduce additional ringing and
edge artifacts respectively, further distorting TEPs. The step-drift artifact was present
exclusively under AC-coupled amplification with an online high-pass filter and absent during
unfiltered DC-coupled recording, supporting a hardware–recording interaction rather than a
neural origin. Such effects are therefore amenable to isolation and control under appropriate
acquisition conditions. Furthermore, we identified a combination of detrending and modified
filters which minimised TEP distortion in both simulated and real data containing step-drift
artifacts. Collectively, these findings motivate clear recommendations for optimising online
acquisition settings to mitigate the artifact and to address secondary filter-induced distortions
when contamination occurs.
Previous work has characterised several artifacts directly induced by the TMS pulse in EEG
recordings. Artifacts include the TMS-pulse artifact (Veniero et al., 2009; Virtanen et al.,
1999), a discharge/decay artifact associated with charges stored at the electrode-gel-skin
interface (Freche et al., 2018; Rogasch et al., 2013; Sekiguchi et al., 2011; Virtanen et al.,
1999), and a recharge artifact associated with recharging of TMS capacitors (Rogasch et al.,
2013; Veniero et al., 2009). In contrast, the present study addresses a distinct, longer lasting
step-drift artifact that emerges post pulse and reflects persistent distortions in EEG voltage.
Unlike discharge artifacts, which decay following a second order power law (Freche et al.,
2018), recovery from the step-drift artifact is slow and non-exponential and appears as a
separate component following ICA, suggesting a distinct mechanism. As step artifact
amplitudes were significantly larger under AC-coupling with an online high-pass filter
compared with DC- coupling with no filter (figure 3), we suggest a hardware-related origin
rather than a classical discharge process, possibly reflecting an interaction between the TMS
pulse and high-pass filter. Prior recommendations suggest DC-coupled systems over ACcoupled systems for TMS-EEG recordings (Hernandez-Pavon et al., 2023). Our findings
provide direct evidence supporting this recommendation, suggesting that AC-coupling can
induce additional TMS-related artifacts not present when using DC-coupling with no online
high-pass filters.
Notably, data collected with DC coupling using the standard amplifier range (±3.28 mV)
resulted in an increased number of channels where signal drifted beyond the amplifier’s
dynamic range (i.e., clipped). Increasing the range from ±3.28 mV to ±16.38 mV
significantly reduced channel clipping, supporting this as a more appropriate configuration.
However, this improvement comes at the cost of reduced effective digitization resolution,
which may attenuate the fidelity of lower-amplitude signal fluctuations. An alternative
approach is to frequently reset the DC offset of the amplifier, which can be automated for
certain EEG amplifiers (e.g., through the BrainVision Recorder’s COM interface). Therefore,
while DC-coupling minimises step-drift artifacts, care must be taken to ensure appropriate
amplification settings to avoid data lost to clipping.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Another important consideration is how TMS hardware settings such as pulse waveform
shape interact with the EEG recording system to produce transient distortions. For example,
one study anecdotally reported larger-amplitude step artifacts with distinct morphologies for
monophasic compared to biphasic pulses (Rogasch 2013). In contrast, we observed no pulse
waveform-dependent differences when amplifier settings were matched in the current study.
The reasons for this discrepancy are unclear but may reflect differences in amplifier models
used across studies (e.g., BrainAmp vs Compumedics). Future work directly comparing
different hardware combinations are required to more formally test the generalisability of
these findings.
In addition to hardware settings during data collection, digital signal processing methods
applied during data cleaning can also distort the brain signal of interest. For example, it is
well known that temporal filtering applied to characteristic artifact waveforms can introduce
secondary, non-neural distortions, with sharp transients known to generate an artifactual
oscillatory response (“ringing”) following high-pass filtering (De Cheveigné and Nelken,
2019). Depending on the characteristics of the artifact, ringing artifacts can resemble the time
course of event-related potentials like TEPs (Tanner et al., 2015). Extending this principle,
the step-drift morphology constitutes an additional filter-sensitive feature, whereby filtering
across sustained offsets and gradual drifts yields predictable ringing and edge artifacts. This
distortion differs from previously described TMS-EEG artifacts and no consensus method
currently exists for its systematic removal or control.
To our knowledge, this study represents the first formal characterisation of a step-drift artifact
in TMS-EEG, despite features consistent with its morphology being visible in previously
published works (Rogasch et al., 2017, 2013) (TESA toolbox manual). Given its prevalence
and impact, we provide practical recommendations to reduce the artifact at acquisition,
alongside a targeted post processing removal strategy for cases in which it persists or
inappropriate amplifier settings are used. Importantly, we validated our processing approach
in both simulated and real data, in line with recent recommendations (Hernandez-Pavon et al.,
2023; Rogasch et al., 2022). Ringing and edge artifacts indicate that the step component must
be removed prior to filtering. Indeed, estimating and subtracting the step magnitude using a
robust detrending approach, with a first-order polynomial fit applied separately to pre- and
post-TMS signals, significantly reduced error relative to the ground truth in simulated data,
and produced more physiologically plausible waveform shapes in real data. Error reductions
scaled linearly across increasing step amplitudes, indicating consistent and proportional
artifact removal. In addition to step removal, we tested a modified Butterworth filter designed
to minimise ringing and edge artifacts arising from the interaction between residual offsets
and temporal filtering by artificially extending the pre- and post-TMS signal using
autoregressive extrapolation (Cline et al., 2021). Although improvements from the modified
filter alone were modest, its inclusion further reduced filtering-related distortions when
combined with robust detrending. Importantly, this optimised combination of methods was
robust to other non-linear artifacts often present in TMS-EEG data, including decay/discharge
artifacts. Figure 8 further demonstrates clear improvements in TEP quality when using these
recommended methods on a larger data set, including reduced baseline distortions and more
physiologically plausible TEP profiles compared with the standard pipeline. We also
introduce an interactive channel selection tool to facilitate identification and removal of
channels disproportionately affected by step-related artifacts, which we expect will yield
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

additional improvements in data quality when applied judiciously. All methods are included
in the TESA toolbox for use and additional testing by the TMS-EEG community (Mutanen et
al., 2020; Rogasch et al., 2017).
A limitation of the present study is that the findings are derived from a specific set of
hardware and amplifier configurations available within our laboratory. While the step-drift
artifact was highly stereotyped across participants in our dataset, further validation is needed
to assess its prevalence and morphology across other amplifier models. Replication across
platforms will be essential to determine the generalisability of our observations and the
robustness of the proposed mitigation strategies. Future work should also evaluate whether
the integration of the offline correction methods proposed in our study are effective in
independent data sets collected by different research groups. Incorporating our functions into
the TESA toolbox provides widespread access to these methods, thereby facilitating
comparisons by other groups.
Together, these findings support two overarching recommendations that prioritise prevention
of step-drift distortions through optimal amplifier settings. First, record TMS-EEG data using
DC-coupled amplification without high-pass filtering, and second, ensure the amplification
range is sufficient to prevent clipping. We also propose a modified offline pipeline that
enables targeted recovery of affected neural signals when prevention is not possible. These
results underscore the importance of explicitly identifying and controlling for artifacts within
TMS-EEG acquisition and processing pipelines. Accordingly, formal definition and routine
recognition of step-drift artifacts are essential to improve data interpretation, reproducibility,
and methodological consistency across the field. Finally, these findings highlight the need for
automated detection and removal approaches to further enhance data quality.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Data and code availability
Data used for the statistical analyses and to generate figures are available from:
https://doi.org/10.25909/32260149
Code used for analyses is available from:
https://github.com/nigelrogasch/tms-eeg-step-filtering-artifacts

Author contributions
Marissa M. Holden: Conceptualisation, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation,
Writing – Original Draft, Visualisation. Mitchell R. Goldsworthy: Conceptualisation, Methodology,
Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision. Wei-Yeh Liao: Investigation, Data Curation, Writing Review & Editing. Scott R. Clark: Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision. Christopher C. Cline:
Software, Writing - Review & Editing. Corey J. Keller: Writing - Review & Editing. Julio C.
Hernandez-Pavon: Writing - Review & Editing. Nigel C. Rogasch: Conceptualisation,
Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing – Original
Draft, Visualisation, Supervision, Project Administration, Funding Acquisition.

Funding
This research work was supported by the Australian Research Council, Australia [FT210100694;
FT230100658].

Declaration and competing interests
In the past 5 years, NCR has received: grant research funding from the Australian Research Council
(ARC), and the Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF); contract research funding from the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), and CMAX Clinical
Research PTY LTD; and consultancy fees from OVID Therapeutics Inc. SRC has received grant
research funding from the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC),
MRFF, Wellcome and the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), participated in advisory and
educational boards and received speaker's fees from Janssen Cliag, Lund-beck, Otsuka, and Servier;
research funding Janssen Cilag, Lundbeck,Otsuka, and Gilead; data sharing from Viatris Australia;
and consultancy fees from Insight Timer. CJK holds equity in Alto Neuroscience, Inc., Flow
Neuroscience, Inc., Constellation Systems, Inc., Kyron Medical, Orchard Neuro, and Noe Neuro.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

References:
Barker, A.T., Jalinous, R., Freeston, I.L., 1985. NON-INVASIVE MAGNETIC STIMULATION OF
HUMAN MOTOR CORTEX. The Lancet 325, 1106–1107. https://doi.org/10.1016/S01406736(85)92413-4
Bergmann, T.O., Karabanov, A., Hartwigsen, G., Thielscher, A., Siebner, H.R., 2016. Combining
non-invasive transcranial brain stimulation with neuroimaging and electrophysiology: Current
approaches and future perspectives. NeuroImage, Transcranial electric stimulation (tES) and
Neuroimaging 140, 4–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.02.012
Biabani, M., Fornito, A., Goldsworthy, M., Thompson, S., Graetz, L., Semmler, J.G., Opie, G.M.,
Bellgrove, M.A., Rogasch, N.C., 2024. Characterising the contribution of auditory and
somatosensory inputs to TMS-evoked potentials following stimulation of prefrontal,
premotor, and parietal cortex. Imaging Neuroscience 2, 1–23.
https://doi.org/10.1162/imag_a_00349
Biabani, M., Fornito, A., Mutanen, T.P., Morrow, J., Rogasch, N.C., 2019. Characterizing and
minimizing the contribution of sensory inputs to TMS-evoked potentials. Brain Stimulation:
Basic, Translational, and Clinical Research in Neuromodulation 12, 1537–1552.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2019.07.009
Bonato, C., Miniussi, C., Rossini, P.M., 2006. Transcranial magnetic stimulation and cortical evoked
potentials: a TMS/EEG co-registration study. Clin Neurophysiol 117, 1699–1707.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2006.05.006
Bruckmann, S., Hauk, D., Roessner, V., Resch, F., Freitag, C.M., Kammer, T., Ziemann, U.,
Rothenberger, A., Weisbrod, M., Bender, S., 2012. Cortical inhibition in attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder: new insights from the electroencephalographic response to transcranial
magnetic stimulation. Brain 135, 2215–2230. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws071
Casarotto, S., Fecchio, M., Rosanova, M., Varone, G., D’Ambrosio, S., Sarasso, S., Pigorini, A.,
Russo, S., Comanducci, A., Ilmoniemi, R.J., Massimini, M., 2022. The rt-TEP tool: real-time
visualization of TMS-Evoked Potentials to maximize cortical activation and minimize
artifacts. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 370, 109486.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2022.109486
Cline, C.C., Lucas, M.V., Sun, Y., Menezes, M., Etkin, A., 2021. Advanced Artifact Removal for
Automated TMS-EEG Data Processing, in: 2021 10th International IEEE/EMBS Conference
on Neural Engineering (NER). Presented at the 2021 10th International IEEE/EMBS
Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), pp. 1039–1042.
https://doi.org/10.1109/NER49283.2021.9441147
Conde, V., Tomasevic, L., Akopian, I., Stanek, K., Saturnino, G.B., Thielscher, A., Bergmann, T.O.,
Siebner, H.R., 2019. The non-transcranial TMS-evoked potential is an inherent source of
ambiguity in TMS-EEG studies. Neuroimage 185, 300–312.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.10.052
de Cheveigné, A., Arzounian, D., 2018. Robust detrending, rereferencing, outlier detection, and
inpainting for multichannel data. Neuroimage 172, 903–912.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.035
De Cheveigné, A., Nelken, I., 2019. Filters: When, Why, and How (Not) to Use Them. Neuron 102,
280–293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.02.039
Delorme, A., Makeig, S., 2004. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG
dynamics including independent component analysis. J Neurosci Methods 134, 9–21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009
Farzan, F., Vernet, M., Shafi, M.M.D., Rotenberg, A., Daskalakis, Z.J., Pascual-Leone, A., 2016.
Characterizing and Modulating Brain Circuitry through Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
Combined with Electroencephalography. Front Neural Circuits 10, 73.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncir.2016.00073
Fischl, B., 2012. FreeSurfer. NeuroImage, 20 YEARS OF fMRI 62, 774–781.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.021

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Freche, D., Naim-Feil, J., Peled, A., Levit-Binnun, N., Moses, E., 2018. A quantitative physical model
of the TMS-induced discharge artifacts in EEG. PLoS Comput Biol 14, e1006177.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006177
Gordon, P.C., Jovellar, D.B., Song, Y., Zrenner, C., Belardinelli, P., Siebner, H.R., Ziemann, U.,
2021. Recording brain responses to TMS of primary motor cortex by EEG - utility of an
optimized sham procedure. Neuroimage 245, 118708.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118708
Hernandez-Pavon, J.C., Kugiumtzis, D., Zrenner, C., Kimiskidis, V.K., Metsomaa, J., 2022.
Removing artifacts from TMS-evoked EEG: A methods review and a unifying theoretical
framework. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 376, 109591.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2022.109591
Hernandez-Pavon, J.C., Metsomaa, J., Mutanen, T., Stenroos, M., Mäki, H., Ilmoniemi, R.J., Sarvas,
J., 2012. Uncovering neural independent components from highly artifactual TMS-evoked
EEG data. J Neurosci Methods 209, 144–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2012.05.029
Hernandez-Pavon, J.C., Veniero, D., Bergmann, T.O., Belardinelli, P., Bortoletto, M., Casarotto, S.,
Casula, E.P., Farzan, F., Fecchio, M., Julkunen, P., Kallioniemi, E., Lioumis, P., Metsomaa,
J., Miniussi, C., Mutanen, T.P., Rocchi, L., Rogasch, N.C., Shafi, M.M., Siebner, H.R., Thut,
G., Zrenner, C., Ziemann, U., Ilmoniemi, R.J., 2023. TMS combined with EEG:
Recommendations and open issues for data collection and analysis. Brain Stimulation 16,
567–593. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2023.02.009
Hyvärinen, A., Oja, E., 2000. Independent component analysis: algorithms and applications. Neural
Networks 13, 411–430. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0893-6080(00)00026-5
Ilmoniemi, R.J., Hernandez-Pavon, J.C., Makela, N.N., Metsomaa, J., Mutanen, T.P., Stenroos, M.,
Sarvas, J., 2015. Dealing with artifacts in TMS-evoked EEG, in: 2015 37th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC).
Presented at the 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), IEEE, Milan, pp. 230–233.
https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2015.7318342
Ilmoniemi, R.J., Virtanen, J., Ruohonen, J., Karhu, J., Aronen, H.J., Näätänen, R., Katila, T., 1997.
Neuronal responses to magnetic stimulation reveal cortical reactivity and connectivity.
Neuroreport 8, 3537–3540. https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-199711100-00024
Julkunen, P., Pääkkönen, A., Hukkanen, T., Könönen, M., Tiihonen, P., Vanhatalo, S., Karhu, J.,
2008. Efficient reduction of stimulus artefact in TMS-EEG by epithelial short-circuiting by
mini-punctures. Clin Neurophysiol 119, 475–481.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2007.09.139
Mutanen, T., Mäki, H., Ilmoniemi, R.J., 2013. The effect of stimulus parameters on TMS-EEG
muscle artifacts. Brain Stimul 6, 371–376. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2012.07.005
Mutanen, T.P., Biabani, M., Sarvas, J., Ilmoniemi, R.J., Rogasch, N.C., 2020. Source-based artifactrejection techniques available in TESA, an open-source TMS-EEG toolbox. Brain Stimul 13,
1349–1351. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2020.06.079
Nikouline, V., Ruohonen, J., Ilmoniemi, R.J., 1999. The role of the coil click in TMS assessed with
simultaneous EEG. Clin Neurophysiol 110, 1325–1328. https://doi.org/10.1016/s13882457(99)00070-x
Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E., Schoffelen, J.-M., 2011. FieldTrip: Open source software for
advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data. Comput Intell
Neurosci 2011, 156869. https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/156869
Pijnenburg, R., Scholtens, L.H., Ardesch, D.J., de Lange, S.C., Wei, Y., van den Heuvel, M.P., 2021.
Myelo- and cytoarchitectonic microstructural and functional human cortical atlases
reconstructed in common MRI space. NeuroImage 239, 118274.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118274
Rocchi, L., Di Santo, A., Brown, K., Ibáñez, J., Casula, E., Rawji, V., Di Lazzaro, V., Koch, G.,
Rothwell, J., 2021. Disentangling EEG responses to TMS due to cortical and peripheral
activations. Brain Stimul 14, 4–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2020.10.011

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Rogasch, N.C., Biabani, M., Mutanen, T.P., 2022. Designing and comparing cleaning pipelines for
TMS-EEG data: A theoretical overview and practical example. J Neurosci Methods 371,
109494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2022.109494
Rogasch, N.C., Fitzgerald, P.B., 2013. Assessing cortical network properties using TMS-EEG. Hum
Brain Mapp 34, 1652–1669. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22016
Rogasch, N.C., Sullivan, C., Thomson, R.H., Rose, N.S., Bailey, N.W., Fitzgerald, P.B., Farzan, F.,
Hernandez-Pavon, J.C., 2017. Analysing concurrent transcranial magnetic stimulation and
electroencephalographic data: A review and introduction to the open-source TESA software.
Neuroimage 147, 934–951. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.10.031
Rogasch, N.C., Thomson, R.H., Daskalakis, Z.J., Fitzgerald, P.B., 2013. Short-latency artifacts
associated with concurrent TMS-EEG. Brain Stimul 6, 868–876.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2013.04.004
Rogasch, N.C., Thomson, R.H., Farzan, F., Fitzgibbon, B.M., Bailey, N.W., Hernandez-Pavon, J.C.,
Daskalakis, Z.J., Fitzgerald, P.B., 2014. Removing artefacts from TMS-EEG recordings using
independent component analysis: importance for assessing prefrontal and motor cortex
network properties. Neuroimage 101, 425–439.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.07.037
Rossini, P.M., Barker, A.T., Berardelli, A., Caramia, M.D., Caruso, G., Cracco, R.Q., Dimitrijević,
M.R., Hallett, M., Katayama, Y., Lücking, C.H., Maertens de Noordhout, A.L., Marsden,
C.D., Murray, N.M.F., Rothwell, J.C., Swash, M., Tomberg, C., 1994. Non-invasive electrical
and magnetic stimulation of the brain, spinal cord and roots: basic principles and procedures
for routine clinical application. Report of an IFCN committee. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology 91, 79–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/0013-4694(94)90029-9
Rothwell, J.C., Thompson, P.D., Day, B.L., Boyd, S., Marsden, C.D., 1991. Stimulation of the human
motor cortex through the scalp. Exp Physiol 76, 159–200.
https://doi.org/10.1113/expphysiol.1991.sp003485
Russo, S., Sarasso, S., Puglisi, G.E., Dal Palù, D., Pigorini, A., Casarotto, S., D’Ambrosio, S., Astolfi,
A., Massimini, M., Rosanova, M., Fecchio, M., 2022. TAAC - TMS Adaptable Auditory
Control: A universal tool to mask TMS clicks. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 370,
109491. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2022.109491
Sekiguchi, H., Takeuchi, S., Kadota, H., Kohno, Y., Nakajima, Y., 2011. TMS-induced artifacts on
EEG can be reduced by rearrangement of the electrode’s lead wire before recording. Clin
Neurophysiol 122, 984–990. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2010.09.004
Siebner, H.R., Bergmann, T.O., Bestmann, S., Massimini, M., Johansen-Berg, H., Mochizuki, H.,
Bohning, D.E., Boorman, E.D., Groppa, S., Miniussi, C., Pascual-Leone, A., Huber, R.,
Taylor, P.C.J., Ilmoniemi, R.J., De Gennaro, L., Strafella, A.P., Kähkönen, S., Klöppel, S.,
Frisoni, G.B., George, M.S., Hallett, M., Brandt, S.A., Rushworth, M.F., Ziemann, U.,
Rothwell, J.C., Ward, N., Cohen, L.G., Baudewig, J., Paus, T., Ugawa, Y., Rossini, P.M.,
2009. Consensus paper: Combining transcranial stimulation with neuroimaging. Brain
Stimulation 2, 58–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2008.11.002
Stokes, M.G., Chambers, C.D., Gould, I.C., Henderson, T.R., Janko, N.E., Allen, N.B., Mattingley,
J.B., 2005. Simple metric for scaling motor threshold based on scalp-cortex distance:
application to studies using transcranial magnetic stimulation. J Neurophysiol 94, 4520–4527.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00067.2005
Tanner, D., Morgan-Short, K., Luck, S.J., 2015. How inappropriate high-pass filters can produce
artifactual effects and incorrect conclusions in ERP studies of language and cognition.
Psychophysiology 52, 997–1009. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12437
Tanner, D., Norton, J.J.S., Morgan-Short, K., Luck, S.J., 2016. On high-pass filter artifacts (they’re
real) and baseline correction (it’s a good idea) in ERP/ERMF analysis. J Neurosci Methods
266, 166–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2016.01.002
Tremblay, S., Rogasch, N.C., Premoli, I., Blumberger, D.M., Casarotto, S., Chen, R., Di Lazzaro, V.,
Farzan, F., Ferrarelli, F., Fitzgerald, P.B., Hui, J., Ilmoniemi, R.J., Kimiskidis, V.K.,
Kugiumtzis, D., Lioumis, P., Pascual-Leone, A., Pellicciari, M.C., Rajji, T., Thut, G.,
Zomorrodi, R., Ziemann, U., Daskalakis, Z.J., 2019. Clinical utility and prospective of TMSEEG. Clin Neurophysiol 130, 802–844. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2019.01.001

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Veniero, D., Bortoletto, M., Miniussi, C., 2009. TMS-EEG co-registration: on TMS-induced artifact.
Clin Neurophysiol 120, 1392–1399. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2009.04.023
Virtanen, J., Ruohonen, J., Näätänen, R., Ilmoniemi, R.J., 1999. Instrumentation for the measurement
of electric brain responses to transcranial magnetic stimulation. Med Biol Eng Comput 37,
322–326. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02513307
Widmann, A., Schröger, E., Maess, B., 2015. Digital filter design for electrophysiological data – a
practical approach. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 250, 34–46.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.08.002
Ziemann, U., Bai, Y., Baumer, F.M., Beck, M.M., Belardinelli, P., Belvisi, D., Bender, S., Bergmann,
T.O., Bortoletto, M., Casarotto, S., Casula, E., Chaves, A.R., de Andrade, D.C., Conte, A.,
Daskalakis, Z.J., Farzan, F., Ferrarelli, F., Fitzgerald, P.B., Gordon, P.C., Grefkes, C.,
Harquel, S., Hernandez-Pavon, J.C., Hill, A.T., Hoy, K.E., Hummel, F.C., Julkunen, P.,
Kallioniemi, E., Keller, C.J., Kimiskidis, V.K., Kirkovski, M., Koch, G., Leodori, G.,
Lioumis, P., Määttä, S., Maidan, I., Massimini, M., Mengel, A., Metsomaa, J., Miniussi, C.,
Mutanen, T.P., Noda, Y., Ozdemir, R.A., Raffin, E., Rocchi, L., Rogasch, N.C., Rosanova,
M., Santarnecchi, E., Sarasso, S., Schabrun, S.M., Shafi, M.M., Siebner, H.R., Tolner, E.A.,
Tomasevic, L., Tremblay, S., Tscherpel, C., Veniero, D., Versace, V., Voineskos, D., Vucic,
S., Zangen, A., Zrenner, C., Ilmoniemi, R.J., 2026. Clinical utility and prospective of TMS–
EEG: Updated review from an international expert group. Clinical Neurophysiology 2111487.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2025.2111487

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary materials
Characterising and Minimising Step and Filtering Artifacts in TMS-EEG Recordings
Marissa M. Holden1,2, Mitchell R. Goldsworthy1,2,3, Wei-Yeh Liao1, Scott R. Clark4, Christopher C.
Cline

,

, Corey J. Keller

,

,7

, Julio C. Hernandez-Pavon8, Nigel C. Rogasch1,2,9

1. School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health, Adelaide University
2. Hopwood Centre for Neurobiology, Lifelong Health Theme, South Australian Health and
Medical Research Institute
3. School of Psychology, College of Education, Behavioural and Social Sciences, Adelaide
University
4. School of Medicine, College of Health, Adelaide University
5. Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
6. Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
7. Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA
8. Department of Psychological Sciences, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA
9. School of Psychological Sciences and Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health, Monash
University, Australia.

Correspondence
Nigel C. Rogasch
Email: Nigel.rogasch@adelaide.edu.au

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary methods

Minimal processing pipeline 1 (for figure 1): Data were epoched around the TMS pulse (-1000 to
1000 ms), and baseline corrected (-500 to -10 ms). The TMS pulse artifact was removed and
interpolated (-2 to 10 ms; cubic interpolation), bad channels and trials were manually identified and
removed, and the data were referenced to the average of all channels.

Minimal processing pipeline 2 (for figure 3): First, we quantified the percentage of data points that
had ‘clipped’ (i.e., moved outside the amplifier range) by counting the number of samples > |3.276|
mV (i.e., the input range of the amplifier) and dividing by the total number of samples across
channels. Next, we removed all the data beyond the first 30 pulses to minimise channels impacted by
clipping, which increased across the duration of the recording in the DC-coupling condition
(supplementary figure S1). We then removed and interpolated data around the TMS pulse in the
continuous recordings (-2 to 10 ms; cubic interpolation) and resampled the data (1000 Hz). Channels
showing flat lines longer than 4 s were removed, data were epoched around the TMS pulse (-1000 to
1000 ms), baseline corrected (-500 to -10 ms), and epochs with values >3 SD either across a single
channel or across all channels were removed. Any missing channels were then replaced using
spherical interpolation and the data were referenced to the average of all channels. Next, interpolated
data and channels were removed prior to FastICA and independent components representing TMSevoked muscle activity, blinks or eye-movement were automatically detected and removed using the
default values of the pop_tesa_compselect.m function. Finally, removed data and channels were
interpolated.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary figure S1: Impact of different notch filters on TEPs. Both TEPs used robust
detrending and a modified high-pass Butterworth filter (1 Hz, fourth order) with autoregressive
extrapolation. The blue line shows data following a standard band-stop (i.e., notch) Butterworth filter
(48-52 Hz, second order). A clear ringing artifact is evident before the pulse when filtering at a
frequency of ~50 Hz. The red line show data following a modified band-stop Butterworth filter using
autoregressive extrapolation (48-52 Hz, fourth order). The ringing artifact was prevented using the
modified filter.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary figure S2: Time course of channels clipping across experimental sessions. Each
panel shows a channel-by-time plot with white indicating the channel was in range, whereas red
indicates the channel was clipping (e.g., >|3.676| mV). Individual participants are shown across rows
whereas different conditions are shown down columns. Clipping is evident in conditions using DCcoupled amplifier settings and generally increases across the duration of the experiment. The
percentage of samples lost to clipping tended to be larger following monophasic pulse shapes
compared to biphasic pulses.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary figure S3: Time course of channels clipping across experimental sessions using
different amplifier ranges. Each panel shows a channel-by-time plot with white indicating the
channel was in range, whereas red indicates the channel was clipping (e.g., >|3.676| mV for low
range; >|16.38| mV for high range). Individual participants are shown across rows whereas different
conditions are shown down columns. Clipping is evident in conditions using DC-coupled amplifier
settings with low amplifier range settings and generally increases across the duration of the
experiment, but is decreased with high amplifier range settings.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.13.725016; this version posted May 18, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary figure S4: The impact of different cleaning combinations on recovering the
ground truth TEP in the presence of decay/discharge artifacts. A) Root mean square error
(RMSE) between the ground truth TEP and cleaned simulated TEPs embedded in real EEG data with
no step artifact and a decay/discharge artifact for 2 different combinations of detrending and filtering.
Bars represent the group mean and error bars the standard error of the mean (n=15). Cleaning
combinations are ranked from highest to lowest RMSE. B) RMSE between the ground truth TEP and
cleaned simulated TEPs embedded in real EEG data with 10 µV step artifact and decay/discharge
artiact for 2 different combinations of detrending and filtering. C) Comparison of simulated TEPs
embedded in real EEG data with no step artifact and decay/discharge artifact including raw data, data
following Butterworth filtering, and the optimal cleaning combination (detrend + modified filter) vs.
ground truth TEP. Solid lines represent group mean and shaded bars represent standard error. The
grey bar indicates the time period in which RMSE was calculated. D) Comparison of simulated TEPs
embedded in real EEG data with 10 µV step artifact and decay/discharge artifact including raw data,
data following Butterworth filtering, and the optimal cleaning combination (detrend + modified filter)
vs. ground truth TEP.

32

