Interdisciplinary, Delphi-driven consensus guidelines on the use of intravenous ketamine infusions for depressive disorders from the American Society of Ketamine Physicians, Psychotherapists, and Practitioners (ASKP3) 

Available online 16 May 2026 0165-0327/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

Research paper Interdisciplinary, Delphi-driven consensus guidelines on the use of intravenous ketamine infusions for depressive disorders from the American Society of Ketamine Physicians, Psychotherapists, and Practitioners (ASKP3)

David S. Mathai a,b,c,\*, Madeleine Cluck a, Amna M. Aslam d, Erin Amato e, Arsalan Azam f, Michael Banov g,h, Kathleen A. Barrett i, Carl J. Bonnett j, David Feifel k,l, Nicolas Grundmann m, H. Samuel Ko n, Rupert McShane o, Sandhya Prashad p, Tatiana Santini q,r, Lowan H. Stewart s,t, Patrick Sullivan u, Stefany D. Wolfsohn v, Jill O. Robinson a, Amy L. McGuire a, L. Alison McInnes w

a Center for Medical Ethics and Health Policy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA b Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA c Sattva Medicine, Psychiatry and Psychotherapy Practice, Miami, FL, USA d Radial, New York City, USA e Montana Psychiatry and Brain Health Center, Billings, MT, USA f Daydream MD, San Diego, CA, USA g Psych Atlanta/Hightop Health, Marietta, GA, USA h Department of Psychiatry, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA, USA i ASKP3 Strategist, Denver, CO, USA j Klarisana, Denver, CO, USA k Kadima Neuropsychiatry Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA l University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA m Ember Health, New York City, NY, USA n Reset Ketamine, Palm Springs, CA, USA o Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Warneford Hospital, Oxford, UK p Houston Center for Advanced Psychiatric Treatment, Houston, TX, USA q BrainStim Health, Vancouver, BC, Canada r California Southern University, Irvine, CA, USA s Nordre Østfold District Psychiatric Senter, Østfold Hospital Trust, Grålum, Norway t Axon Clinic, Oslo, Norway u Initia Medical Solutions, Cherry Hill, NJ, USA v Ventura Center for Advanced Therapeutics, Camarillo, CA, USA w Mindful Health Solutions, Oakland, CA, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords: IV ketamine Racemic ketamine Depression Psychiatry Delphi Guidelines

A B S T R A C T

Background: Off-label use of intravenous ketamine (IVK) for depression is a widespread practice with limited regulation in the United States. There is an urgent need for current, evidence-informed treatment guidelines to facilitate patient safety, clinical decision-making, and care quality in real-world contexts. Methods: The American Society of Ketamine Physicians, Psychotherapists and Practitioners (ASKP3) convened an interdisciplinary working committee tasked with creating guidelines for use of IVK for depression in outpatient settings. Guideline development followed a two-stage process: 1) a hybrid systematic and targeted evidence review and preliminary drafting by the committee, and 2) consensus refinement through a modified Delphi method using a panel composed of the committee and ASKP3 expert faculty. Panelists rated their agreement with proposed guideline items using a 9-point Likert scale, and consensus was predefined as a median rating ≥ 7 with

\* Corresponding author at: 19300 W Dixie Hwy Suite 2, Aventura, FL, 33180, USA.

E-mail address: dmathai@bcm.edu (D.S. Mathai).

Journal of Affective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Affective Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jad

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2026.121970 Received 11 March 2026; Received in revised form 11 May 2026; Accepted 14 May 2026

D.S. Mathai et al. Journal of A ective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

an interquartile range ≤ 2 after Round 2. Consensus strength was evaluated using percentage agreement thresholds. Results: Of 39 invited experts, 28 completed at least one round of the survey. Consensus was achieved on 73 of 75 of proposed guideline items (97%), with most items reaching very strong consensus (i.e., ≥90% of panelists rating a statement within the 7–9 range). Guideline items were organized across seven key practice areas. Conclusions: By combining a hybrid literature review and Delphi process, we developed expert consensus rec- ommendations for the safe and effective use of IVK for depression. These guidelines can support decision-making, standardize clinical practice, improve patient outcomes, and promote equitable access to this emerging treat- ment, while informing ongoing research and policy development.

1\. Background

Depression is among the top contributors of global disease burden, but its pharmacological treatment has long been challenged by the limited efficacy, poor tolerability, and delayed onset of conventional antidepressant therapies for some patients (Baig-Ward et al., 2023). Ketamine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, was approved for medical use by the United States Food and Drug Admin- istration (FDA) in 1970 as an anesthetic and became available as a generic medication in the 1990s. In 2000, the first randomized controlled trial using a subanesthetic dose of intravenous (IV) ketamine for depression indicated positive outcomes (Berman et al., 2000). Since then, numerous studies have demonstrated a favorable short-term safety and efficacy profile for ketamine as a rapid-acting antidepressant (McIntyre et al., 2021; Namiot et al., 2024). Despite some limitations of this literature – including a modest number of randomized controlled trials, predominantly short-term follow-up, and heterogeneous study designs – ketamine has been adopted into routine clinical practice as an “off-label” treatment for depression (Mathai and Mathew, 2024).

In 2019, the FDA approved intranasal esketamine (the (S)-enan- tiomer of racemic ketamine) for use as an adjunctive therapy in adults with treatment-resistant depression (TRD). Importantly, this decision marked a shift from the monoaminergic approach that had until then dominated psychiatric drug development and signified the first NMDA receptor antagonist to receive FDA approval for a depressive indication, following decades of preclinical and clinical research on this drug class (Wilkinson et al., 2024). FDA approval of esketamine expanded to include adults with major depression and suicidal ideation and behavior in 2020 and, as of January 2025, includes its use as a monotherapy in adults with TRD. Major criticisms of esketamine have centered on the uncertainty surrounding the short-term efficacy data that was submitted to the FDA and the limited durability of treatment effects (Fountoulakis et al., 2025). Other questions, such as the safety and effectiveness of repeated administration, have been partially addressed by emerging post-marketing real-world evidence (Sanacora et al., 2025). Reflecting its growing role in psychiatric treatment, esketamine generated over $1 billion in revenue in 2024 (Bayer, 2025).

Racemic ketamine is widely available as an inexpensive, generic medication in the US, but its lack of patent protection and challenges with current approval pathways have limited progress toward expanded regulatory approval of ketamine for psychiatric indications (Mathai et al., 2022a; Sahragardjoonegani et al., 2021). As a result, ketamine remains an off-label treatment for depression, which may influence factors such as insurance coverage, institutional adoption, clinical standardization, and public perception. This remains the case despite an accumulating body of research suggesting that ketamine demonstrates comparable or superior benefit, safety, and tolerability relative to esketamine (Bahji et al., 2021; Correia-Melo et al., 2020; Elmosalamy et al., 2025; Feng et al., 2025; Meisner et al., 2025; Nikolin et al., 2023; Saelens et al., 2025; Singh et al., 2023; Terao et al., 2024). Arketamine, the (R)-enantiomer of racemic ketamine, may contribute to these ad- vantages, as preclinical studies suggest that it prolongs antidepressant effects and clinical data indicate that it produces fewer dissociative and psychotomimetic effects compared with esketamine (Kawczak et al.,

2

2024; Leal et al., 2025). It should be noted, however, that long-term efficacy and safety data are considerably more extensive for intranasal esketamine than for IV racemic ketamine (Sanacora et al., 2025), and the uncertainty surrounding long-term outcomes with IV ketamine re- mains a meaningful limitation of the current evidence base.

Key differences in administration and regulatory oversight for ke- tamine and esketamine should also be highlighted. Due to potential risks for sedation, dissociation, and misuse, esketamine is highly regulated through a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) drug safety program that was mandated by the FDA as a condition for drug approval (Janssen Pharmaceuticals, 2020). The REMS program restricts use of esketamine to its approved dosages, indications, and administration settings. This ensures that clinical practice replicates the conditions studied in research trials submitted to the FDA. Esketamine must be dispensed and administered in certified healthcare settings under pro- fessional supervision and with monitoring of patients for at least two hours after dosing (Janssen Pharmaceuticals, 2020). Healthcare pro- fessionals must also complete REMS training and become certified to correctly administer the drug, monitor patients, and report adverse events. No analogous program currently exists for racemic ketamine. As such, there is greater flexibility in how ketamine can be used by clini- cians but also increased risk for misuse and harm. To the authors' knowledge, this represents the only instance of such marked regulatory differences between single enantiomers of the same molecule.

Currently, esketamine may be favored over racemic ketamine given its FDA approval, standardized protocols, and lower out-of-pocket costs through insurance coverage and manufacturer assistance programs (Elmosalamy et al., 2025). It may also better align with patient prefer- ences and clinic workflow in some contexts, as it avoids IV cannulation and provides a less invasive administration route (Elmosalamy et al., 2025; Mathai et al., 2021). However, other factors discussed pre- viously—such as drug cost, effectiveness, safety, and flex- ibility—underscore the value of racemic ketamine as a therapeutic option distinct from esketamine, particularly if care were standardized. In practice, off-label use of ketamine is already widespread, highlighting the urgent need for guidelines to ensure safe and effective clinical practice (Pacilio et al., 2025; Wilkinson et al., 2024).

Several key efforts have been made to steer best practices involving the use of ketamine for depressive disorders. Given that most published research to date has focused on IV ketamine (IVK), prior consensus ef- forts have primarily addressed this route of administration. A consensus statement on the use of IVK to treat mood disorders was published by the American Psychiatric Association in 2017 (Sanacora et al., 2017). This resource was not intended to serve as a definitive guideline, as the au- thors cited insufficient knowledge about the effectiveness and safety of treatment in real-world settings to support such an effort then. Another international expert opinion published in 2021 synthesized ongoing evidence for ketamine and esketamine in TRD (McIntyre et al., 2021). However, this effort was classified primarily as a literature review, lacked an interdisciplinary process, and reported conflicts of interest in over half of the authors with the drug sponsor of esketamine. Notable guidelines have been written by academic groups in Canada (Swainson et al., 2021), New Zealand, Australia (Bayes et al., 2021; Beaglehole et al., 2023; Hussain et al., 2025), the United Kingdom (Jelen et al.,

D.S. Mathai et al. Journal of A ective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

3 2024; Singh et al., 2017), France (Lengvenyte et al., 2022), Norway

preliminary list of guideline items – generated by the working com- (Berthold-Losleben et al., 2025), and even within the US Department of

mittee and informed by a literature review – was provided to an expert Veteran Affairs (VHA Office of Integrated Veteran Care, 2025). Various

panel for iterative revision. practitioners in the US have also proposed recommendations for safe

The Delphi panel was composed of members of the working com- and ethical use of ketamine for psychiatric indications (Harding, 2023;

mittee and the remaining ASKP3 expert faculty. The expert faculty Mathai et al., 2022a; Ryan and Bennett, 2020; Wolfson et al., 2026;

group included 36 interdisciplinary healthcare professionals who had Wolfson and Braunstein, 2025), though none of these are reflective of

been previously chosen by ASKP3 to help with organizational tasks. large-scale, real-world expert consensus.

Faculty selection occurred through a process that considered clinical There have been several developments that now make a consensus

expertise with ketamine-based treatments, academic and research con- treatment guideline for IVK in the broader US health care system not

tributions to the field, professional diversity across disciplines only possible but essential. Substantial research has emerged in recent

(including psychiatry, emergency medicine, anesthesiology, nursing, years, including real-world evidence from thousands of patients sup-

and psychology), geographic representation across the US and interna- porting the use of IVK for mood and anxiety disorders (Alnefeesi et al.,

tionally, and willingness to participate in ongoing ASKP3 educational 2022; Fancy et al., 2023; Gutierrez et al., 2024; Hietamies et al., 2023;

activities. Working committee membership was further refined based on McInnes et al., 2022; Oliver et al., 2022). FDA approval of esketamine

relevant domain expertise and availability for the project timeline. has expanded to additional indications, with mounting data confirming

One faculty member on the working committee (DSM) oversaw the safety and clinical utility of these new approaches (Oraee et al.,

survey methodology and was excluded from Delphi participation. The 2024). Reasons for concern have also become more apparent. Home use

35 remaining expert faculty were invited to participate, along with 4 of 5 of oral ketamine has been increasing in popularity and injectable sub-

board members serving on the working committee. One non-clinician cutaneous ketamine is now being offered by mail without clear stan-

board member (KAB) served in an administrative role and was there- dards to guide these practices (Wilkinson et al., 2024). Ketamine misuse

fore excluded as a panelist. is on the rise, compounding pharmacies making ketamine are being scrutinized, and reports of ketamine-related deaths have added to

2.2. Identification of key questions, hybrid literature review, and guideline heightened vigilance and demands for oversight (Wilkinson et al.,

drafting 2024). Across care settings, the medical and psychiatric competencies required for treatment remain poorly defined.

The working committee identified seven essential question domains The American Society of Ketamine Physicians, Psychotherapists and

related to the use of IVK for depression to form the basis of the guidelines Practitioners (ASKP3) was founded in 2016 and currently includes more

These domains were selected to address areas in which the current than 400 multidisciplinary professionals. ASKP3 has been at the fore-

literature is limited, inconsistent, or ambiguous and requires further front of identifying and disseminating best practices for ketamine

interpretation to guide clinical practice. Specifically, these included: 1) treatment through forums such as annual conferences, sponsored

the published evidence for IVK in depressive disorders; 2) clinician training sessions, public workshops with the FDA, meetings with state

qualifications and treatment settings; 3) key components of the psy- regulatory agencies, and patient-centered educational resources. The

chiatric evaluation prior to treatment; 4) key components of the medical guidelines presented here extend previous efforts by ASKP3 (Sullivan

evaluation prior to treatment; 5) best practices for safe initiation and et al., 2020) and reflect the latest developments in knowledge related to

maintenance; 6) elements of written informed consent; and 7) essential the use of IVK for depressive disorders. We have centered our work on

documentation. By focusing on these areas, the Delphi method could treatment of depression with IV ketamine, as this indication and route

generate expert consensus to fill critical gaps and support safe, effective, have the most robust evidence base for efficacy, safety, and clinical

and standardized clinical practice. procedures. Although emerging research suggests potential benefits of

Subgroups of committee members were assigned to draft preliminary ketamine for other conditions (Kwan et al., 2024; McInnes et al., 2025;

answers to each question domain, informed by existing literature. One Whittaker et al., 2021) and alternative routes of administration (Duong

committee member (DSM) supported the literature review methodology et al., 2026; Mathai et al., 2024, 2021; McIntyre et al., 2020a; Saelens

and evidence synthesis. A hybrid literature review was conducted using et al., 2025; Silberbauer et al., 2026), the predominantly observational

both a systematic and targeted approach. This decision was made to nature of these data and lack of high-quality evidence preclude guideline

ensure comprehensive review for one guideline domain that focused development in these areas at this time.

primarily on evidence appraisal, while allowing flexibility for other There is substantially more evidence to support clinical guidelines

domains where experimental data were lacking. The systematic search for IVK for depression; however, important gaps remain, particularly

was primarily designed to support Delphi consensus development rather with respect to real-world implementation and practice. This Delphi

than to serve as an independent systematic review. consensus project aimed to bridge these gaps by developing evidence-

To review the evidence for IVK for depressive disorders (Guideline informed, expert-driven recommendations that integrate existing liter-

Question 1), we conducted a systematic search of PubMed/MEDLINE, ature with collective clinical expertise. These recommendations are

Embase, and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews) for studies intended for individual practitioners, healthcare organizations, regula-

published between January 2020 to July 2025, in accordance with tory bodies, and third-party payers seeking to implement or oversee safe

PRISMA 2020 guidelines. This search was guided by PICOS criteria: and effective IVK treatment for depression.

Population = adults with unipolar or bipolar depression; Intervention = IV ketamine treatment; Comparator = with or without a comparator; 2. Methods

Outcome = standard clinical outcomes related to depression and suici- dality (e.g., severity, response, and remission); Study design = meta- 2.1. Working committee formation, delphi planning, and panel selection

analysis. The review was not prospectively registered (e.g., PROSPERO). The search was restricted to meta-analyses to prioritize high-level evi- In 2024, ASKP3 convened a working committee of 5 board members

dence; primary studies and other designs were incorporated through a and 14 faculty, drawn from the organization's larger expert faculty

complementary targeted review (see below). The date range was group, to develop guidelines for the use of IVK in depressive disorders.

selected to capture recent evidence syntheses in a rapidly evolving The Delphi method was selected to reduce bias related to a typical

literature and to extend, rather than duplicate, prior review and working group process, allow for systematic refinement of guideline

consensus efforts. Search terms and exclusion criteria are provided in the items, and promote quantifiable consensus. A modified process was used

Supplementary Materials. Title, abstract screening, and study selection to incorporate both literature appraisal and expert opinion, in which a

were performed by two reviewers (DSM and LAM), with discrepancies

D.S. Mathai et al. Journal of A ective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

4 resolved through discussion. Two reviewers (DSM and AMA) indepen-

a median rating ≥ 7 with an interquartile range ≤ 2 on the Likert scale dently conducted data extraction using a standardized template that

after Round 2. As a sensitivity check, items with ≥75% agreement were included potential sources of conflict; these reviewers also indepen-

also noted. To aid in the interpretation of panelist agreement, consensus dently conducted quality and bias assessments for the included studies

strength was defined using percentage agreement thresholds: moderate using the JBI critical appraisal tool (Hilton, 2024). Discrepancies were

(≥75%), strong (≥80%), and very strong (≥90%). Statistical summaries resolved through consensus.

and response rates for both rounds were reported. Statements that failed In parallel, a targeted literature review was conducted using the

to reach consensus after two rounds were discarded and reported as same databases to inform all guideline domains. Guideline questions 2–7

areas lacking agreement. Following survey completion, minor editorial were informed exclusively by this targeted review rather than a formal

revisions were made by the working committee only when necessary to systematic review of the literature. No date restrictions were applied.

ensure accuracy and clarity, while preserving the meaning of consensus Data from meta-analyses, systematic reviews, and randomized

statements. controlled trials (RCTs) were prioritized as the highest quality of evi-

Several measures were implemented to mitigate the risk of confor- dence for recommendations, though large retrospective studies, small

mity effects, anchoring bias, and undue influence. These included: open-label trials, case series, and other existing guidelines were also

anonymous individual voting using a secure REDCap platform (panelists considered. Findings from both reviews were synthesized narratively

were not aware of one another's specific responses); provision of and used to form a preliminary draft of guideline items. The strength of

aggregate quantitative feedback and de-identified qualitative comments research evidence for each item was indicated by the Oxford Centre for

from panelists between rounds; independent methodological oversight Evidence-Based Medicine (OCEBM) level (Durieux et al., 2013).

by academic collaborators with Delphi expertise; and pre-specified consensus thresholds. 2.3. Delphi procedure and consensus determination

A preliminary narrative literature synthesis and draft guideline

2.4. Ethical considerations document – organized by the seven guideline domains and summarizing the evidence relevant to each – was prepared by the working committee

Participants were provided with a study information sheet describing and distributed to all expert panelists prior to Round 1. For purposes of

the purpose, procedures, risks and voluntary nature of participation, this project, expertise was operationalized as recognized clinical expe-

with completion of the survey indicating implied consent. Demographic rience with ketamine-based treatments, contributions to the academic or

information was not collected within the survey to preserve confiden- clinical literature, and active engagement with ASKP3's educational

tiality. Because the expert panel was small and its members were mission. Consensus-building and identification of areas of disagreement

familiar with one another, collecting or reporting identifying charac- were achieved through a survey procedure in which panelists remained

teristics for respondents could have increased the risks of identification, anonymous to one another.

response bias, and potential professional consequences related to non- A team of academic collaborators (DSM, MC, JOR, and ALM) from

participation. To maintain transparency regarding panel composition, Baylor College of Medicine (BCM) with expertise in Delphi methods

professional characteristics and specialty information for all invited provided technical and analytic support for all Delphi-related proced-

experts were summarized using publicly available sources rather than ures. Surveys were administered using BCM REDCap, a secure, web-

respondent-level survey data. These procedures were reviewed and based platform hosted at BCM. Invitations with study information and

approved by the BCM Institutional Review Board. survey links to participate were first emailed to the 17 eligible members of the working committee for pilot testing. The survey instrument was

3\. Results revised based on feedback and then distributed to the final panel of 39 experts (i.e., 35 expert faculty and 4 board members), with the goal of

3.1. Literature review and guideline drafting achieving an end panel size of approximately 15–20 participants completing two rounds of rating. All experts were invited to complete

The PRISMA flow diagram for the systematic review of the evidence both rounds of the Delphi and received one email invitation and up to

base for IVK for depression is provided in Fig. 1; a total of 24 meta- two reminders for each round. They were encouraged to participate in

analyses were included in this review. The narrative synthesis of find- both rounds for a better consensus-building process and were also

ings from both the systematic literature review and the complementary offered voluntary acknowledgement in any resulting publication for

targeted review is presented in the Appendix. These findings were used their contributions.

to draft 75 guideline items that were evaluated by the Delphi expert In Round 1, panelists were asked to consider both the summarized

panel. Characteristics of the meta-analyses included in the systematic evidence and their clinical experience, then rate their level of agreement

review, the results of the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) critical appraisal with proposed guideline items using a 9-point Likert scale (1 = strongly

assessments of these studies (Hilton, 2024), and the original guideline disagree; 5 = uncertain; 9 = strongly agree). They were encouraged to

items derived from the literature review and committee drafting process provide free-text comments to clarify their positions, express concerns,

can be found in the Supplementary Materials. or note any missing considerations. Responses were analyzed for mea- sures of central tendency (i.e., median, interquartile range), percentage agreement (i.e., % of panelists rating a statement within the 7–9 range),

3.2. Delphi recruitment, study flow, and panel characteristics and open-ended feedback that was aggregated across all experts. Com- ments were reviewed to identify opportunities for item clarification.

For pilot testing, 6 of 17 invited experts (35%) consented to partic- Minor revisions to the guideline items at this stage were driven primarily

ipate and completed the initial survey. In Round 1, 21 of 39 invited by consistent feedback patterns; however, the study team also adopted

experts (54%) consented to participate and completed the survey. high-value individual recommendations when they were deemed likely

Nineteen of these went on to complete Round 2 along with 7 panelists to enhance interpretability and support consensus while preserving item

who completed Round 2 only, leading to 26 of 39 experts (67%) constructs.

participating in Round 2 and 28 of 39 experts (72%) participating in In Round 2, panelists evaluated the revised list of items using the

either Round 1, Round 2, or both. Surveys were administered from same rating protocol and were provided with their prior responses,

October to December 2025. A study flow diagram including professional quantitative summaries of group ratings, and aggregate feedback from

characteristics and primary specialty area for all 39 invited experts is Round 1 to inform subsequent ratings. Consensus was defined a priori as

shown in Fig. 2.

D.S. Mathai et al. Journal of A ective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

3.3. Delphi rounds

Consensus was achieved on 73 of 75 proposed guideline items (97%) by survey completion. These items are shown in Table 1, along with the degree of consensus and evidence grade for each item. Of the 73 items

5

Fig. 2. Delphi study flow diagram and characteristics of the invited expert panel (n = 39).

Fig. 1. PRISMA flow diagram for systematic review of meta-analyses.

that achieved consensus, 53 (73%) reached very strong consensus, 16 (22%) reached strong consensus, and 4 (5%) reached moderate consensus. Changes in panelist agreement over Rounds 1 and 2 of the survey are shown in Fig. 3. A detailed record of item evolution across rounds, including quantitative ratings and aggregated feedback, is

D.S. Mathai et al. Journal of A ective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

Table 1

Table 1 (continued) Delphi consensus guidelines on the use of intravenous ketamine infusions for depressive disorders in outpatient settings.

Guideline Item Guideline Item

6

Expert Consensusa Evidence

Gradeb Expert

Evidence Consensusa Gradeb

2.6 Treatment personnel should provide IVK for depression in a private, comfortable and Section 1: What is the published evidence for IV ketamine (IVK) for depressive disorders?

adaptable medical setting with attention to 1.1 The acute antidepressant effect of IVK in

how the patient environment may influence patients with depressive disorders is well-

treatment. established.

Very Strong Level 3

Very Strong Level 1

2.7 Treatment personnel should be familiar with 1.2 Existing data support an acute/induction

the range of subjective experiences (e.g., phase of treatment with ketamine that

emotional, cognitive, perceptual) that may includes approximately 4–6 infusions over

arise during ketamine treatment, and 2–4 weeks.

recognize that some may be challenging for patients to tolerate.

Very Strong Level 5 Very Strong Level 1

1.3 There is insufficient published evidence to

Strong Level 1 support additional clinical benefit from

2.8 In settings where multiple patients are administering ketamine three or more times

receiving treatment simultaneously, there weekly compared with twice-weekly dosing

should be sufficient qualified healthcare during induction treatment.

personnel on-site to ensure medical and psy- 1.4 While some degree of titration above 0.5 mg/

chiatric safety for all patients at all times kg of ketamine may be warranted based on

during treatment. clinical response and patient-specific factors, there remains limited published evidence regarding the safety and efficacy of doses greater than 1.0 mg/kg.

Very Strong Level 5

Strong Level 1

2.9 The treatment facility and personnel should

have a standardized approach to escalating the level of care during an adverse event as necessary. 1.5 While there is evidence that subjective qualities of the ketamine experience may predict antidepressant efficacy for some patients, this research literature remains inconclusive. Caution is therefore recommended around ongoing dose escalation that is aimed primarily at reproducing a particular intensity of subjective experience for patients rather than achieving demonstrable clinical benefit.

Very Strong Level 5

Moderate Level 1

Section 3: What are the necessary elements of a psychiatric evaluation prior to IVK for

depression? 3.1 The psychiatric evaluation for ketamine

treatment should include a detailed psychiatric history, mental status exam, formulation and diagnosis, assessment of risk, and shared discussion regarding the treatment plan.

Section 2: Who can provide IVK for depression and in what settings? 2.1 Ketamine should be administered and

overseen by licensed medical professionals with expertise in the assessment, diagnosis, and management of individuals with depressive disorders.

Very Strong Level 5

3.2 When IVK is used for depression, the patient's psychiatric history and current symptoms should be sufficiently reviewed to support the diagnosis of a major depressive episode related to major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder, consistent with DSM-5 criteria.

Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

3.3 We recommend use of standardized scales to

quantify depression severity. 2.2 We do not recommend restricting ketamine- based treatment for depression solely to med- ical professionals with formal anesthesia or critical care specialty training. However, to ensure adequate medical competence, treat- ment personnel should at minimum have training in IVK for depression, be able to conduct a medical assessment to determine or confirm treatment appropriateness, be able to identify and respond to medical risks associ- ated with IVK (e.g., sedation, airway compro- mise, hemodynamic instability, and vomiting), and work collaboratively with the patient's broader medical care team.

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

3.4 Patients should be assessed for the

Very Strong Level 1 appropriateness of concurrent therapy with a mood-stabilizing medication and closely monitored for mood switching if ketamine is being used for the treatment of bipolar depression. 3.5 Prior trials of medications and non- pharmacological interventions should be reviewed and evaluated as decisions are made about the appropriateness of ketamine treatment.

2.3 In situations where ketamine treatment professionals lack sufficient psychiatric or medical expertise, we recommend a team- based model of care ensuring that appropri- ately qualified professionals are integrated into the patient's evaluation and treatment process.

Very Strong Level 5

3.6 Some degree of basic psychological

assessment (e.g., exploring personality structure, coping styles, and psychological functioning) is encouraged as part of the psychiatric evaluation.

Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

3.7 Patients with comorbid personality disorders

may benefit from ketamine on a case-by-case basis but may require additional mental health support and safety planning.

2.4 IVK for depression should be administered in

healthcare settings that are capable of cardiorespiratory surveillance and by medical professionals who are qualified to monitor heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation.

Very Strong Level 2

3.8 Ketamine should not be used in adults with

psychotic features who are at risk for worsening impairment, unless the anticipated benefits of treatment are deemed to outweigh the risks involved, and the treatment team is experienced in managing these conditions.

Very Strong Level 5 Very Strong Level 5

3.9 Ketamine should not be used in adults with 2.5 BLS certification and training in conscious

severe dissociative conditions who are at risk sedation should be considered the minimum

for worsening impairment (e.g., dissociative competency standard for healthcare

identity disorder), unless the anticipated professionals administering IVK for

benefits of treatment are deemed to outweigh depression. Clinicians should also be equipped

the risks involved, and the treatment team is to recognize and manage cases in which

experienced in managing these conditions. patients inadvertently transition to a deeper level of sedation than intended.

Strong Level 5 Moderate Level 5

3.10 Ketamine should not be used in adults with

mixed manic or hypomanic symptoms who are at risk for worsening impairment, unless

Strong Level 5

(continued on next page)

D.S. Mathai et al. Journal of A ective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

Table 1 (continued)

Table 1 (continued)

Guideline

Expert

Evidence

Guideline

Expert

Evidence Item

Consensusa Gradeb

Item

Consensusa Gradeb

the anticipated benefits of treatment are

medical conditions, surgeries, allergies, deemed to outweigh the risks involved, and

medications, family history of medical illness, the treatment team is experienced in

a medical review of symptoms, and the managing these conditions.

relevant components of a systems-focused 3.11 Ketamine should not be used in adults with

Strong Level 5

physical exam. neurocognitive disorders who are at risk for

4.2 Ketamine is contraindicated in individuals worsening impairment (e.g., dementia types

who have shown hypersensitivity to the drug. prone to delirium, psychosis, or behavioral dysregulation), unless the anticipated benefits of treatment are deemed to outweigh the risks involved, and the treatment team is experienced in managing these conditions. 3.12 Ketamine should not be used in adults with

active substance use disorders who are at risk for worsening impairment (e.g., individuals with poor adherence to care or not engaged in a comprehensive substance use treatment program), unless the anticipated benefits of treatment are deemed to outweigh the risks involved, and the treatment team is experienced in managing these conditions.

7

Very Strong Level 5

4.3 Ketamine is contraindicated in individuals for whom a significant elevation of blood pressure or intracranial pressure would constitute a serious hazard.

Strong Level 5

4.4 Ketamine is not currently recommended in

patients who are pregnant, given insufficient data to draw conclusions about any drug- associated risk of major birth defects, miscar- riage, or adverse maternal or fetal outcomes.

Moderate Level 5 Strong Level 5

4.5 Caution should be exercised in patients with

cardiovascular conditions who are at risk for hemodynamic complications, and consultation with medical specialists is encouraged prior to moving forward with treatment in these populations. 3.13 High-risk, primary mental health conditions other than depression (e.g., psychosis, mania, severe substance use disorders) should be stabilized first, prior to considering treatment with ketamine over other approaches.

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

4.6 Caution should be exercised in patients who

Very Strong Level 5 are at risk for potential airway or respiratory compromise, and consultation with medical specialists is encouraged prior to moving forward with treatment in these populations. 4.7 Factors that could affect the metabolism of 3.14 If ketamine is initiated in high-risk psychi-

ketamine should be considered, including atric populations, we recommend psycho-

age, advanced liver or renal disease, and drug- education about potential risks, thorough

drug interactions. documentation of informed consent, a well- documented risk-benefit assessment, clearly defined and time-limited treatment pro- tocols, close psychiatric and subspecialty monitoring for adverse reactions, established criteria for stopping treatment, and use of strategies for risk mitigation.

Very Strong Level 5 Very Strong Level 5

4.8 For medical screening, blood pressure, heart

rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation should be collected during the initial assessment and before each dosing session.

3.15 Patients at immediate and high risk of suicide should be managed by clinicians experienced in handling this risk in community settings or may require treatment in more controlled and secure environments for ketamine administration (e.g., inpatient/residential).

Strong Level 5

4.9 If there are persistent, significant abnormalities in vital signs (e.g., systolic blood pressure \> 150 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure \> 100 mmHg, heart rate \> 100 bpm, or oxygen saturation \< 95%) and there is uncertainty regarding patient safety prior to drug administration, treatment should be deferred until further assessment is conducted and medical stability is confirmed.

Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

3.16 Decisions about treatment selection should

4.10 Laboratory studies or diagnostic tests may be be informed by the psychiatric evaluation,

appropriate to collect on a case-by-case basis clinical data, and a review of the potential

for the workup of medical causes of depres- benefit of alternative treatment options that

sion (e.g., untreated endocrine disorders, may be available to the patient (e.g.,

neurological conditions, infections, chronic adjustments in medication, switching

inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, antidepressants, augmenting with other

nutritional deficiencies, etc.). psychotropic medications, or other FDA- approved interventions).

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

4.11 Laboratory studies or diagnostic tests may be obtained on a case-by-case basis to determine 3.17 Decisions about treatment selection should

medical appropriateness for treatment (e.g., occur collaboratively, involve the patient

comprehensive metabolic panel, complete and their relevant clinicians, and incorporate

blood count, pregnancy test, and EKG) with the patient's personal and sociocultural

the potential for expanded testing based on preferences.

individual risk factors.

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

3.18 Realistic expectations regarding the goals of treatment should be set for the patient, patient's support system, and treatment professionals.

Very Strong Level 5

Section 5: What are the best practices for safe initiation and maintenance of IVK for

depression?

3.19 If adjunctive psychotherapy is expected to

provide benefit, the details of this option should be clearly communicated to patients, including who might provide the therapy, the therapist's qualifications, and the proposed

5.1 In addition to ensuring appropriate personnel, setting, and assessment before IVK, clinicians should conduct a thorough informed consent process with patients and offer adequate preparation for drug administration.

setting and timing of sessions relative to ketamine administration.

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

5.2 Preparation for IVK with patients should

include an exploration of beliefs about the illness, personal motives for treatment, expectations, and concerns. Section 4: What constitutes an appropriate medical evaluation for IVK for depression? 4.1 A comprehensive medical evaluation should

include information about the patient's medical history, including past and present

Very Strong Level 5

5.3 Preparation for IVK with patients should include psychoeducation involving ketamine, its mechanisms of action, its common effects, its potential risks, reasonable appraisals of

Very Strong Level 5 Very Strong Level 5

(continued on next page)

D.S. Mathai et al. Journal of A ective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

Table 1 (continued)

Table 1 (continued)

Guideline

Expert

Evidence

Guideline

Expert

Evidence Item

Consensusa Gradeb

Item

Consensusa Gradeb

benefit, and strategies for responding to a

structured check-ins, psychoeducation, sup- variety of challenging medical or psychiatric

portive psychotherapy, integration-focused experiences that may occur.

therapy) that supports patients as they pro- 5.4 Preparation for IVK should include discussion

Very Strong Level 5

cess experiences with ketamine, work of any necessary precautions (e.g., to not eat

through emotionally and psychologically or drink for a period of time prior to treatment,

difficult content, manage potential disap- to not drive or engage in potentially hazardous

pointments about treatment, navigate safety, activities following dosing until after a night of

and strive for durable benefit. restful sleep, to make any necessary

5.17 Clinics administering IVK should have arrangements for transportation ahead of

protocols and communication with patients time, etc.).

for managing patient safety concerns (e.g., 5.5 The clinical team should aim to develop

worsening suicidality) outside of scheduled rapport and trust with the patient prior to

treatment sessions or business hours. drug administration.

8

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

5.18 Maintenance treatment may be appropriate 5.6 Ketamine for IV infusions should be sourced

to consider on a case-by-case basis for from an FDA-approved drug manufacturer (i.

relapse prevention in individuals who have e., a commercially available product) when-

failed other treatments for depression, ever possible.

demonstrate a clear positive outcome from ketamine induction (e.g., ≥50% improve- ment), and are at risk of relapse without continued treatment.

Strong Level 1 Very Strong Level 5

5.7 If a commercially manufactured product is

Very Strong Level 5 unavailable and compounded ketamine is used for treatment, clinicians should prioritize sourcing from an FDA-registered 503B com-

5.19 Maintenance treatment may occur on fixed, pounding pharmacy, and patients should be

time-based intervals or flexible, symptom- informed of FDA warnings related to use of

based schedules, but in either case, the pri- compounded ketamine products.

ority is to lengthen the infusion interval as 5.8 Ketamine for IV infusions should be

tolerated while sustaining clinical benefit. administered with a pump that ensures regulated dose delivery.

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

5.20 Maintenance treatment should occur within

a larger mental health treatment plan (e.g., 5.9 Use of additive or proprietary formulations of

including lifestyle modifications, behavioral ketamine as a treatment for depression is not

activation, skills development, increased currently recommended.

social support, and/or psychotherapy).

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

5.10 For ketamine-naïve patients with depression,

Moderate Level 1

5.21 Ketamine discontinuation should be

Very Strong Level 5 we suggest initiating IVK at 0.5 mg/kg over

considered if patients fail to respond to \~40 min with an induction series of 4–6

ongoing treatment or lack functional infusions over 2–4 weeks, with adjustments

improvement despite optimization of drug guided by patient response and preference.

and non-drug factors related to treatment. 5.11 It may be reasonable to carefully titrate dose

Strong Level 1

5.22 To evaluate the relative benefits and risks of

Very Strong Level 5 above 0.5 mg/kg in patients who do not

ongoing treatment versus stopping or initially respond to treatment, while also

changing therapies, we recommend considering the limited data on the safety

continuous assessment and documentation of and efficacy of doses exceeding 1.0 mg/kg

the rationale for maintenance treatment, use and providing clinical justification for any

of validated scales for tracking clinical doses above this threshold.

response, and detailed record of side effects 5.12 Doses lower than 0.5 mg/kg may be

and adverse events with treatment. appropriate to initiate for some patients, particularly those who are anxious about side effects, have demonstrated difficulty tolerating higher ketamine doses, are known to be sensitive to medications, or have impaired drug metabolism.

Very Strong Level 1

Section 6: What are the elements of written informed consent for IVK for depression? 6.1 We recommend the use of a written consent procedure for IVK that includes the following key elements: patient information, medication

5.13 IVK should be administered by a qualified medical professional, and patients should be monitored for a period of time (e.g., 30–60 min) after the completion of the infusion until they have returned to baseline, can ambulate independently with steady gait, and are assessed as medically and psychologically stable to safely leave the healthcare setting with arranged transportation.

details (including disclosure of off-label use and rationale for treatment), potential benefits and requirements of treatment (e.g., quality of evidence to guide maintenance treatment, potential time/financial commitment, and patient responsibilities while engaging in treatment), health risks/adverse effects (including risks unique to psychoactive drug administration), options for alternative treat- ment, voluntary nature of treatment, outline of general procedures (e.g., for evaluation, monitoring, follow-up, and emergency/ safety), and a consent statement with signa- ture of the patient/legal guardian, the treat- ment professional, and date.

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

5.14 Vital signs should be checked before drug

Strong Level 5 administration and after treatment completion, with the potential for additional vital sign monitoring during the infusion as determined by the overseeing clinician to be appropriate. 5.15 Patients should be observed for any signs of

distress or adverse reactions during

6.2 The consent document should be readable, with language that is appropriate for the patient and their level of education.

treatment, and the clinical team should be prepared to provide basic medical, psychiatric, and emotional support as needed with defined protocols for safety and care escalation.

Very Strong Level 5

Very Strong Level 5

6.3 It should be determined that the patient is capable of making an informed, independent, and voluntary decision.

5.16 Following dosing sessions, we recommend

some form of psychological aftercare (e.g.,

Very Strong Level 5

6.4 Before signing, patients should have the opportunity to discuss consent with their clinician and have all questions answered to their satisfaction.

Very Strong Level 5

Strong Level 5

(continued on next page)

D.S. Mathai et al. Journal of A ective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

Table 1 (continued)

Guideline

Expert Item

Consensusa 9 Evidence Gradeb

6.5 After signing, patients should be offered a copy of the signed consent form for their records.

Very Strong Level 5

Section 7: What are the essential elements of documentation for IVK for depression? 7.1 We recommend documentation of the initial medical and psychiatric evaluation, including the clinical assessment, rationale for treatment, preliminary treatment plan, assessment of concomitant medications, risk considerations, and informed consent procedure.

Very Strong Level 5

7.2 For subsequent treatment visits, we

recommend documentation of any relevant interval history or clinical assessments, the overall course of treatment, details of individual dosing sessions, ongoing clinical monitoring (including management of adverse events), post-treatment observations, and aftercare instructions.

Very Strong Level 5

a Degree of consensus: Moderate ≥75% agreement (i.e., ≥ 75% of panelists rating item in 7–9 range); Strong ≥80% agreement; Very Strong ≥90% agreement.

b Evidence level indicates strength of research evidence based on Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (OCEBM) levels: Level 1 = Supported by data from meta-analyses and systematic reviews of RCTs; Level 2 = Supported by data from RCTs; Level 3 = Supported by data from non-randomized controlled cohorts; Level 4 = Supported by data from case series or case- control studies; Level 5 = Supported by mechanism-based reasoning, expert opinion and/or existing guidelines.

provided in the Supplementary Materials.

Two items failed to reach consensus and were removed from the guidelines after Round 2. One of these items proposed that ketamine- based treatment for depression should not be restricted to medical professionals with post-graduate training in psychiatry. Panelist feed- back indicated that some experts viewed post-graduate psychiatric training as the appropriate standard of care for those offering IVK for depression based on the required competencies. Similarly, another panelist suggested that ketamine clinicians who can offer multiple mental health treatment options may be better positioned to maintain a

Fig. 3. Evolution of panel agreement for guideline items across Delphi rounds.

balanced view of available therapeutic alternatives. The other item that failed to reach consensus proposed that adjusted or ideal body weight, rather than actual body weight, be used to calculate the starting dose in ketamine-naïve individuals with obesity. Feedback indicated one panelist who advocated for dosing based on actual body weight, while another proposed setting a maximum dose to help guard against excessive drug exposure. Despite not meeting formal consensus criteria, both removed items were agreed on by 73% of experts.

4\. Discussion

By combining a systematic and targeted review of existing literature with expert consensus methodology, we aimed to create an evidence- based standard for the use of IV ketamine in treating depression in outpatient settings in the United States. Unlike previous efforts toward consensus guidelines (McIntyre et al., 2021; Sanacora et al., 2017), we used an interdisciplinary framework to account for diverse clinical perspectives, evaluated substantial data that has been published in recent years from both clinical trial and real-world settings, and focused on developing a highly practical resource that could be implemented across stakeholders.

The final 73-item guideline presented here reflects strong expert consensus across several key domains. The high degree of consensus observed here likely reflects several factors. First, the guideline items were grounded in a literature review and draft framework, which may have reduced conceptual variability in early phases of the Delphi pro- cess. Second, item revision across rounds focused on clarifying language and incorporating feedback to consolidate areas of shared agreement. Finally, the panel consisted of experts working within an emerging but increasingly converging evidence base, which may indicate genuine alignment around standards of care rather than artificial consensus. Qualitative data revealed meaningful differences in clinical reasoning, further reinforcing the idea that agreement was achieved through use of pragmatic, evidence-informed items and careful iterative refinement, rather than through conformity among panelists.

Our findings lend additional support for the effectiveness, safety, and feasibility of IVK for depression. It should be noted that due to the published evidence base, these guidelines primarily focus on the in- duction series of ketamine treatment (i.e., the initial 4–6 infusions). While research in repeated maintenance ketamine treatment is limited and still underway (Smith-Apeldoorn et al., 2022), experts strongly

D.S. Mathai et al. Journal of A ective Disorders 411 (2026) 121970

10 agreed that maintenance dosing is a reasonable strategy for relapse

Grundmann: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, prevention in select patients when used within the context of a larger

Conceptualization. H. Samuel Ko: Writing – review & editing, Project mental health treatment plan and with the goal of reducing the fre-

administration, Conceptualization. Rupert McShane: Writing – review quency of treatment over time. The practices outlined around patient

& editing, Writing – original draft. Sandhya Prashad: Writing – review selection, informed consent, care infrastructure, and clinical monitoring

& editing, Project administration, Conceptualization. Tatiana Santini: can help mitigate both short- and long-term risks of IVK for patients.

Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. Lowan H. Stewart: Based on the ratings and feedback gathered, one critical area for

Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. Patrick Sullivan: ongoing standardization is to establish the degree of psychiatric training

Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Conceptualization. and mental health proficiency required to provide IVK for depression.

Stefany D. Wolfsohn: Writing – review & editing. Jill O. Robinson: Differing views on this issue are clear from other guidelines (Bayes et al.,

Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, 2021; Hussain et al., 2025; McIntyre et al., 2021; Ryan and Bennett,

Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Amy L. McGuire: 2020; Sanacora et al., 2017; Swainson et al., 2021; Wolfson and

Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project Braunstein, 2025) and may stem from specialty-based perspectives on

administration, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. L. what constitutes best practice. Expert feedback also indicated a need for

Alison McInnes: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, guidance around dosing limits for IVK, as prospective research evalu-

Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Formal analysis, ating doses above 1.0 mg/kg actual body weight remains limited despite

Conceptualization. being a high-priority area (Li et al., 2025a). In addition to exploring these issues, future guideline efforts could address best practices related

Disclosures to non-IV routes of ketamine administration, applications beyond depression, at-home use without direct clinical supervision, and the use

DSM is owner of Sattva Medicine and has received consulting fees of adjunctive psychotherapies with ketamine.

from ASKP3 and Beckley Clinical. AMA is an employee at Radial. EA is Several limitations should be noted: the relatively small size and

owner of Montana Psychiatry and Brain Health Center, serves as a professional familiarity of the Delphi panel may have limited the inde-

speaker for Johnson & Johnson, and is a stockholder in Turnwell Mental pendence of responses and generalizability of the findings to the broader

Health, Inc. AA is owner of Daydream MD. MB is owner of Psych population. Furthermore, the absence of systematic disclosures for all

Atlanta/Hightop Health. KAB is a paid consultant with ASKP3. CJB is Delphi panelists—due to the anonymized design—represents a source of

owner of Klarisana. DF is owner of Kadima Neuropsychiatric Institute bias, as undisclosed financial relationships may have influenced re-

and serves as a consultant for AtaiBeckley, Helus, and Otsuka. NG is sponses. However, the existence and diversity of this expert group also

owner of Ember Health. HSK is owner of Reset Ketamine. RMcS runs a represent a strength, and measures were taken to protect confidentiality

ketamine clinic on behalf of his employer Oxford Health NHS Founda- and minimize risks of undue influence. Because participant de-

tion Trust. SP is owner of Houston Center for Advanced Psychiatric mographic information was intentionally not collected in a way that

Treatment. TS is an employee at BrainStim Health. LHS is an owner of might be linked to individual responses, respondent-level and subgroup

Axon Clinic. PS is owner of Initia Nova Medical Solutions. SDW is owner analyses were also not possible. Such analyses could have provided

of Ventura Center for Advanced Therapeutics. LAM is an employee at insight into how characteristics such as profession and specialty may

Mindful Health Solutions and serves on the Scientific Advisory Board for influence ratings. Finally, consensus for some items reflected expert

Osmind. DSM, AMA, EA, AA, MB, CB, DF, NG, HSK, RMcS, SP, TS, LHS, judgment rather than well-established scientific literature. Although

PS, SDW, and LAM all serve as volunteer faculty with ASKP3. The expert consensus offers meaningful guidance in areas where evidence is

remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the limited, it should not be interpreted as a substitute for continued

absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be research and empirical validation.

construed as a potential conflict of interest. Ultimately, ketamine has evolved from its initial us