In-patient treatment and structural dysconnectivity in major depression - A longitudinal connectome study

Available online 13 June 2026 0924-977X/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

In-patient treatment and structural dysconnectivity in major depression - A longitudinal connectome study

Jonathan Repple a,b,l,1,*, Pascal Grumbach c,d,1, Marius Gruber a,b,l, Marco Mauritz a, Siemon de Lange e,f, Verena Enneking a, Tiana Borgers a, Melissa Klug a, Anna Kraus a, Nils R. Winter a, Susanne Meinert a, Elisabeth J. Leehr a, Kira F. Ahrens b, Paula Rehm b, Henry Staub b, Franka Timm b, Sharmili Edwin Thanarajah b,i, Andreas Reif b, Nils Opel a,g,j, Tim Hahn a, Martijn van den Heuvel e, Udo Dannlowski a,2, Ronny Redlich a,h,j,k,2

Institute for Translational Psychiatry, University of Münster, Germany; Goethe University Frankfurt, University Hospital, Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Frankfurt, Germany; and others.

Keywords: Neuroplasticity, Biomarker, Treatment effect, Dysconnectivity, Major depressive disorder

ABSTRACT
Altered brain structural connectivity has been implicated in the pathophysiology of Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), yet its stability over time and responsiveness to treatment remain unclear. This study utilized network science to analyze the white matter connectome based on longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging data in MDD. In MDD patients (n = 109) undergoing various in-patient treatments (including n = 50 receiving electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)), we compared pre-treatment and six-week follow-up data to that of healthy controls (HC; n = 43). There was a significant group (MDD vs. HC)-by-time (pre vs. post) interaction (pFWE < 0.05; network based statistic t-threshold = 1.5, component size: 404 edges; Cohen's d = 0.104, 95% CI [0.102, 0.106]), which was driven by MDD patients showing significantly increased connectivity strength post-treatment in a widespread brain network. The observed changes in connectivity were not found in HC and were not confined to any specific treatment, indicating a general effect unrelated to particular therapies like ECT. Furthermore, the level of connectivity increase was linked to a reduction of depression symptoms (pFWE < 0.05; network based statistic t-threshold = 1.5, component size: 304 edges, partial η2 = 0.041, 95% CI [0.038, 0.044]), suggesting a link between neuroplastic effects and effective treatment. Brain connectome alterations show a dynamic pattern during treatment in MDD, indicative of a potential new biomarker for treatment response in MDD. Results underline the importance of considering brain connectome changes and neuroplastic mechanisms as potential treatment targets in MDD.

European Neuropsychopharmacology 112 (2026) 112898
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroneuro.2026.112898

1. Introduction
Treatments for severe major depressive disorder (MDD) are limited in their effect sizes and the mechanisms behind treatment effectiveness are poorly understood. Biomarkers for mental disorders such as MDD, for effectiveness of treatments or even prescriptive biomarkers that would suggest a specific treatment are currently missing (Winter et al., 2024). Structural brain network ("connectome") alterations have been proposed as a possible pathophysiological mechanism involved in mental disorders in general and in MDD particularly. Structural brain network analysis is based on white matter tract reconstruction: the brain is segmented into nodes based on T1-weighted MRI, with connections or edges between these nodes determined by diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). In MDD patients, structural connectome alterations have been linked with disease severity, cognitive deficits, as well as genetic and environmental risk factors for depression. However, whether MDD-associated structural connectome alterations change over time and whether possible connectome changes are linked to specific treatments and are associated with treatment response is currently unknown due to the lack of longitudinal structural connectome studies in MDD.

In previous whole-brain connectomics research, we demonstrated that patients with MDD exhibit reduced connectivity strength, as measured by the number of streamlines, within a subnetwork encompassing all major brain regions (Repple et al., 2023). When accounting for remission status, our cross-sectional analysis revealed the greatest impairments in patients with acute MDD compared to those in full remission. Based on these findings, we hypothesize an increase in structural connectivity after treatment in MDD patients. Specifically, we investigated whether 1) MDD patients show reduced connectivity before treatment compared to healthy controls (HC), 2) inpatient-treatment in MDD patients increases the structural connectome, and whether 3) the extent of structural connectome changes after treatment is linked to treatment response based on changes in the Hamilton Depression Scale.

2. Experimental procedures
2.1. Participants and study design
One hundred seventy eight subjects – 123 subjects diagnosed with current major depressive disorder and 55 healthy controls - participated, and were part of the Münster Neuroimaging Cohort (MNC). Patients were recruited naturalistically with treatment being assigned based on the decision of the clinician in charge. All subjects were diagnosed with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR (Wittchen et al., 1997). In the process of image quality control, 26 additional subjects (12 HC, 14 MDD) had to be excluded. Therefore, the final sample comprised 109 patients with MDD (50 receiving ECT, 59 without ECT) and 43 HC. We conducted a nonrandomized prospective study. The two groups (MDD, HC) were investigated at 2 time points each (pre-, post-treatment). Of the 109 MDD patients, 50 patients received additional ECT treatment. The pre-post interval in the MDD and HC groups was 6 to 7 weeks. Approved by the ethics committee of the Ärztekammer Westfalen-Lippe and the Medical Faculty, University of Muenster (approval number: 2007–307-f-S).

Table 1: Demographic and clinical characteristics. MDD (n=109): Sex ♀60 ♂49; Age 38.94 ± 12.42 (18–61). HC (n=43): Sex ♀22 ♂21; Age 41.49 ± 12.17 (19–57). Days between scans: MDD 47.33 ± 13.97, HC 53.60 ± 18.49 (p=.027). HAMD pre: MDD 24.06 ± 5.27, HC 0.98 ± 1.75. HAMD post: MDD 12.87 ± 8.19, HC 0.97 ± 1.85. ΔHAMD: MDD −11.18 ± 8.61, HC 0.08 ± 1.82. Depression episodes 4.40 ± 5.51; Hospitalizations 2.57 ± 2.15; Time in depressed state 3.09 ± 4.59 years. Medication Index pre 2.95 ± 1.88, post 3.25 ± 1.90, Δ 0.29 ± 1.40.

2.2. DTI data acquisition
Data was acquired using a 3T whole body MRI scanner (Gyroscan Intera, Philips Medical Systems). DTI data acquired in 36 axial slices, 3.6 mm thick with no gap (acquired matrix 128 × 128), voxel size 1.8 × 1.8 × 3.6 mm³. Echo time 95 ms, repetition time 9473 ms. B-value of 1000 s/mm² for 20 diffusion-weighted images plus one non-diffusion-weighted (b=0) image. Total acquisition time ~8 min per subject.

2.3. Anatomical connectome reconstruction
For each participant, we obtained a network of 114 cortical brain regions along with reconstructed white matter streamlines between these regions. Each subject's network was stored in a connectivity matrix with matrix entries representing edges, i.e., connectivity strength measured as the number of reconstructed streamlines (NOS) between two nodes. Edges were included if they incorporated at least three reconstructed streamlines.

2.4. Network based statistic
We employed Network-based statistic (NBS) to identify networks of edges related to in-patient treatment (Zalesky et al., 2010). Each edge was assigned a t-value; t-values thresholded at t = 1.5 to select suprathreshold edges. A threshold of 1.5 was chosen based on previous work. Repeated 5000 times in permutation tests. For effect size estimates we report the average Cohen's d or partial η2 plus confidence interval across all edges within the respective significant subnetwork.

2.5. Analysis
Statistical analyses on demographic data performed using IBM SPSS Statistics 25. We performed a group-by-time interaction analysis within NBS with group (MDD vs. HC) as between-subjects factor and time (pre vs. post) as within-subjects factor. Post-hoc t-tests corrected with FDR (Benjamini & Hochberg). To find associations of network alterations with treatment response, we performed linear regression within NBS to predict changes in the 21-item Hamilton depression scale (ΔHAMD) from longitudinal changes of NOS matrices. All analyses corrected for age and sex.

3. Results
There was a significant time (pre vs. post) x group (MDD vs. HC) interaction (pFWE < 0.0150; NBS t-threshold = 1.5, component size: 404 edges; Cohen's d = 0.104, 95% CI [0.102, 0.106]). MDD patients showed reduced connectivity strength at baseline compared to healthy controls (pFWE, FDR < 0.0322; component size: 486 edges; Cohen's d = 0.340) with no significant group differences after treatment (pFWE, FDR= 0.1203). MDD patients showed a significant increase of connectivity strength over time (pFWE, FDR = 0.0184; 225 edges; Cohen's d = 0.130), an effect not detected in HC (pFWE, FDR= 0.1384). Additional graph-theoretical analyses showed no significant changes in global network topology, supporting a non-random structural reorganization. A significant subnetwork where an increase of connectivity strength was associated with a decrease in depression symptom severity was identified in MDD patients (pFWE < 0.0386; 304 edges; partial η2 = 0.041). Changes were distributed across several higher-order association systems including default-mode and fronto-parietal networks. A treatment (ECT vs. Non-ECT)-by-time interaction analysis within the MDD sample did not reveal any significant results (p > .31). The pattern was not due to head motion artifacts or days between MRI scans, and the increase in connectivity was not related to baseline medication intake, changes in medication or disease history.

4. Discussion
We demonstrate an increase in connectivity strength in a subnetwork of edges in patients after treatment, which was absent in healthy controls. Reduced connectivity strength present in MDD patients compared to healthy controls before treatment was not detectable anymore after treatment. The increase in connectivity strength was correlated with a decrease in depression symptoms. No differences between patients who received ECT compared to those who did not receive ECT emerged. This pattern of results suggests that structural connectome metrics are possible biomarkers for treatment effects in severely depressed patients. The causal mechanisms behind these observed effects remain unclear. While the development of new, large-scale white matter tracts within the brain over such a brief time period is highly improbable, it seems more plausible that the observed changes are attributable to microstructural modifications in the white matter. Changes were seen after learning interventions, visuo-motor training, neurofeedback in stroke patients and TMS treatment in depression patients. These results suggest neuroplastic mechanisms at the core of these changes. Recent studies point to the significance of non-synaptic, particularly white matter plasticity. A study combining diffusion weighted imaging with immunohistochemistry in animal models suggests that myelination plays a key role. Our results corroborate the proposed notion of neuroplastic effects as the basis for several antidepressant treatments such as ECT, TMS or antidepressants. All patients received a complex multimodal in-patient depression treatment including psychopharmacotherapy, psychotherapeutic interventions, exercise program, group therapy, cognitive training and occupational therapy.

5. Limitations
This study is based on a convenience sample. First, the study design was naturalistic in that treatment was assigned by the treating physician and therefore not randomized. Results suggest an unspecific treatment effect. DTI acquisition parameters used are outdated. More advanced DTI techniques with more diffusion directions and reverse phase encoding would yield better results. The stability of enhanced brain connectivity post-treatment and its potential long-term clinical benefits should be explored in future longitudinal studies with a longer follow-up period.

6. Conclusion
Our study adds to the growing body of evidence supporting the role of neuroplasticity in the treatment of MDD. Our results demonstrate a notable alleviation of structural brain dysconnectivity in MDD patients, a change most pronounced in individuals exhibiting the greatest reduction in depressive symptomatology.
