Silicon Sycophants: The Effects of Computers that Flatter

Int. J. Human-Computer Studies (1997) 46, 551—561

Silicon sycophants: the effects of computers that flatter

B. J. FOGG AND CLIFFORD NASS, Department of Communication, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-2050, USA. email: bjfogg@stanford.edu/bjfogg@acm.org
(Received 30 January 1996 and accepted in revised form 30 October 1996)

A laboratory experiment examines the claims that (1) humans are susceptible to flattery from computers and (2) the effects of flattery from computers are the same as the effects of flattery from humans. In a cooperative task with a computer, subjects (N=41) received one of three types of feedback from a computer: "sincere praise", "flattery" (insincere praise) or "generic feedback". Compared to generic-feedback subjects, flattery subjects reported more positive affect, better performance, more positive evaluations of the interaction and more positive regard for the computer, even though subjects knew that the flattery from the computer was simply noncontingent feedback. Subjects in the sincere praise condition responded similarly to those in the flattery condition. The study concludes that the effects of flattery from a computer can produce the same general effects as flattery from humans, as described in the psychology literature. These findings may suggest significant implications for the design of interactive technologies.

1. Introduction
No study has examined the effects of a duplicitous computer—one whose words do not necessarily match the situation. This study looks at one kind of mismatch between words and reality: flattery. Flattery is defined as communicating positive things about another person without regard to that person's true qualities or abilities. This study investigates the effects of computers that praise users regardless of their actual performance on a task. Two questions: can computers effectively flatter users? And if so, are the effects of flattery from a computer the same as the effects of flattery from another human being? This prediction is based on the "Computers Are Social Actors" or "CASA" paradigm (Nass, Steuer, Tauber & Reeder, 1993; Nass, Steuer & Tauber, 1994; Reeves & Nass, 1996). CASA studies demonstrate that the social rules and dynamics guiding human—human interaction apply equally well to human—computer interaction. Individuals can be induced to behave as if computers warranted human consideration, even though users know that the machines do not actually warrant this treatment, a process known as ethopoeia.

2. Effects of flattery
Common findings from the flattery literature: Targets tend to believe that flatterers speak the truth. As Cialdini (1993) puts it, "We are phenomenal suckers for flattery" (p. 145). Insincere praise and sincere praise may well induce the same effects. Flattery creates positive affect in the target: people feel good when others flatter them. Even if the targets judge the content to be inaccurate, the flattery still produces positive affect. Related to positive affect is increased power-feeling and importance. Targets like those who flatter them, even if the flattery is excessive, except when an ulterior motive is clear. Targets judge the performance of flatterers more favorably, and perceive the flatterer to be more intelligent.

3. Relevance to human–computer interaction
Human flattery may work because people believe the content of the flattering message. People expect other people to observe an implied social contract of sincerity in communication (Grice, 1975; Jones, 1990). However, this implied social contract may not apply in human—computer interaction. Reciprocation norms (Cialdini, 1993) and balance theory (Heider, 1958) might explain certain effects of flattery, but humans have no social obligations to machines. Despite these arguments against the potential efficacy of computer flattery, we find the possibility highly compelling, given the CASA paradigm.

4. Method
4.1. PARTICIPANTS: Forty-one college undergraduates volunteered to participate in a computer experiment called the "Animal Game". Gender was balanced across conditions.
4.2. DESIGN: Three conditions: (1) "sincere praise", (2) "flattery" (insincere praise) and (3) "generic feedback".
4.3. PROCEDURE: The interaction consisted of 12 rounds of a guessing game like "20 Questions" using a computer program written for this experiment. In each round the computer prompted the subject to think of an animal, then posed yes/no questions. If the computer guessed incorrectly, it enlisted the subject's help to refine the game's algorithm by asking the subject to input a yes/no question. At this point the computer provided feedback (sincere praise, flattery or generic feedback). Once subjects completed 12 rounds (~15 min), they completed a questionnaire and were debriefed.
4.4. MANIPULATION: All three conditions were identical except for the type of feedback. The "sincere praise" and "flattery" conditions were identical except for what subjects were told beforehand. Sincere praise subjects were led to believe the feedback was contingent on their input (computer would compare with work of hundreds of previous participants). Flattery subjects were told the evaluations would be noncontingent—nothing to do with actual performance. In reality, for both conditions, the evaluations were pre-programmed and identical. Subjects received mostly positive feedback (e.g., "Your question makes an interesting and useful distinction. Great job!" or "You seem to have an uncommon ability to structure data logically"). In total, subjects saw 10 strongly positive evaluations and two somewhat negative (added to give positive evaluations more credibility). In the generic feedback condition, subjects simply saw "Begin next round".
4.5. DEPENDENT MEASURES: Four-page questionnaire with 10-point Likert scales measuring: (1) subject's feelings during interaction, (2) perception of interaction, (3) perception of computer.
4.6. ANALYSIS: Six indices constructed (Cronbach's alpha ≥ 0.77). Positive affect (good, happy, relaxed, α=0.77); Power-feeling (important, powerful, dominant, α=0.85); User's perception of own performance (four items, α=0.87); Enjoyment of interaction (fun, creative, rewarding, α=0.84); Willingness to continue working (r=0.86); Evaluation of computer's performance (helpful, intelligent, insightful, α=0.89).

5. Results
Manipulation check showed all subjects correctly indicated whether the praise was (ostensibly) contingent or not. Praise from the computer—both contingent (sincere praise) and noncontingent (flattery)—had a remarkable impact.
5.1. FLATTERY VS. GENERIC FEEDBACK: Effects of flattery were strong and pervasive. Compared to generic feedback, flattery subjects reported higher positive affect, higher power feeling, and rated themselves as performing better—despite knowing the evaluations were not relevant to their actual work. Flattery subjects thought the interaction was more enjoyable and were more willing to continue working with the computer. They also perceived the computer to have performed better.
5.2. SINCERE PRAISE VS. GENERIC FEEDBACK: Each index showed a significant difference. Sincere praise subjects reported higher positive affect, felt more powerful, thought they performed better, enjoyed the interaction more, were more willing to continue, and felt the computer performed better.
5.3. FLATTERY VS. SINCERE PRAISE: As predicted, none of the six comparisons is significant (largest t-value 1.2, all others below 1.0). The data provide compelling evidence that flattery from a computer is as effective as sincere praise in generating positive responses from users.

6. Discussion
The most important finding is that praise from a computer is extremely powerful. Praise makes people feel better about themselves, their performance, the interaction and the computer—even when users know the positive feedback has no bearing on their actual work. The beneficial effects of sincere praise and flattery from a computer were identical. This provides additional support for the Computers Are Social Actors paradigm: a computer is not just another machine; it is a social actor. Design implications: computers should praise people frequently, even when there may be little basis for the evaluation. Flattery works as well as sincere praise, probably because positive feedback (unlike negative feedback) is usually accepted without scrutiny. Adding sincere praise or flattery to training/tutorial software may increase user enjoyment, task persistence and self-efficacy. Applications that help users perform arduous or distasteful tasks (tax software, weight loss, checkbook balancing) seem ideal candidates for copious positive feedback. Key findings: (1) praise has multiple beneficial effects on user perceptions and (2) flattery from computers generates the same effects as sincere praise. Humans are susceptible to flattery from computers in the same way as from other humans.

[References: Berscheid & Walster 1978; Byrne, Rasche & Kelley 1974; Cawsey 1989; Cialdini 1993; Drachman et al. 1978; Ferrari 1986; Fiske & Taylor 1984; Gaines 1981; Grice 1975; Heider 1958; Jones 1964, 1990; Jones & Wortman 1973; Kumar & Beyerlein 1991; Kunda 1987; Nass et al. various; Nielsen 1990; Pandey & Kakkar 1982; Pandey & Singh 1987; Pridemore & Klein 1991; Reeves & Nass 1996; Ross & Fletcher 1985; Schurick et al. 1985; Sellen 1990; Swann & Schroeder 1995; Swann et al. 1990; Taylor & Brown 1988; Watt 1993; Wortman & Linsenmeier 1977.]
