Journal of Personality and Social Psychology

Manuscript version of

Is My Loneliness Killing Me? Effects of Loneliness and Social Isolation on Transitions Between Cognitive Status Categories and Death

Tomiko Yoneda, Kathryn L. Jackson, Emily C. Noyer, Christopher R. Beam, Gabrielle Pfund, Stephen Antonoplis, Emorie Beck, Katy Bedjeti, Pei Qin, Kayla M. Garner, Jing Luo, Karina Van Bogart, Lily Pieramici, Katherina Hauner, Nicholas A. Turiano, Paraic S. O'Suilleabhain, Lisa Barnes, David A. Bennett, Graciela Muniz Terrera, Daniel K. Mroczek, Bryan D. James, Andrew Steptoe, Anthony D. Ong, Eileen K. Graham

Funded by:

• National Institutes of Health

© 2026, American Psychological Association. This manuscript is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors’ permission. The final version of record is available via its DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000606

This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Abstract

Loneliness and social isolation are associated with numerous adverse physical and

psychological health outcomes in older adulthood, including cognitive impairment and mortality

risk. Yet, how the individual and joint effects of loneliness and social isolation contribute to these

outcomes remains unclear, particularly given the interplay between individual differences

(loneliness) and environmental factors (social isolation) in shaping these important health outcomes

in older adulthood (i.e., person-environment interactions). We used Cox regression, logistic

regression, and multistate survival models to systematically investigate the individual and adjusted

associations among loneliness, social isolation, cognitive aging outcomes, and mortality risk.

Further, extensive between-study variability in operational definitions, modelling approaches, and

covariate adjustments may be contributing to mixed results in the existing literature. In this

Registered Report, we applied a multi-study approach (i.e., coordinated data analysis) in which

independent but identical models were fit across 11 longitudinal studies representing participants

from 18 countries (Ntotal=175,070). Random effects meta-analyses synthesized results across studies,

showing that loneliness was consistently associated with an elevated risk of cognitive impairment

and mortality across statistical approaches, even after adjusting for social isolation. Conversely,

social isolation was not consistently associated with cognitive impairment, and showed weaker

associations with mortality risk. Together, our findings suggest that loneliness is a robust, proximal

predictor of major aging outcomes and highlight avenues for theory development, strategies to

strengthen cognitive resilience and independence in older adulthood, and more efficient resource

allocation of public health resources.

Keywords: loneliness; social isolation; cognitive impairment; dementia; older adulthood;

multi-state survival models; mortality

1

Introduction

Social connection and social contact are vital aspects of the human experience, undeniably

essential for everything from development (Hartup, 1989; Orben et al., 2020) and brain function

(Hari et al., 2015), to well-being (Diener, 2009) and health (Kaplan et al., 1977; Uchino, 2006).

Thus, it is unsurprising that the absence of social connection and contact (i.e., loneliness and social

isolation) is contributing to a major public health concern (Holt-Lunstad, 2022), posing problems

across countries and cultures (Fakoya et al., 2020; Fokkema et al., 2012; Miyawaki, 2015; Surkalim

et al., 2022). Indeed, the United States Surgeon General has declared loneliness and social isolation

a public health epidemic (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2023), highlighting the

urgency of addressing these issues not only in the United States but also globally. This declaration

aligns with growing international concerns, exemplified by initiatives such as the UK's appointment

of a Minister for Loneliness in 2018 (UK Government, 2018).

Individuals across the entire lifespan report experiencing loneliness and social isolation

(Cacioppo et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2019; Röhr et al., 2021; Twenge et al., 2021). While loneliness is

most prevalent among adolescents under 25 years and adults 65+ years (Beam & Kim, 2020; Victor

& Yang, 2012), both loneliness and social isolation are a substantial concern for some older adults

(Courtin & Knapp, 2017; d’Hombres et al., 2021; Donovan & Blazer, 2020; Freedman & Nicolle,

2020; National Academies of Sciences, 2020; Victor & Yang, 2012). Notably, both loneliness and

social isolation are associated with several adverse physical and psychological health outcomes for

the aging demographic (Cornwell & Waite, 2009; Coyle & Dugan, 2012; Donovan & Blazer, 2020;

Holt-Lunstad, 2017; Ong et al., 2016; Prohaska et al., 2020). For example, loneliness and social

isolation are linked to cognitive decline (Boss et al., 2015; Samtani et al., 2022), depressive

symptoms (Cacioppo et al., 2006), poor sleep quality (Benson et al., 2021), heart disease

(Hakulinen et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2021), and stroke (Hakulinen et al., 2018; Valtorta et al., 2016) in

older adulthood (see also, Courtin & Knapp, 2017).

2

Given shifting aging demographics worldwide, there is a pressing need to describe and

address the destructive impact of loneliness and social isolation. Cognitive impairment and

mortality represent two of the most significant challenges to healthy aging, with profound

implications for individual well-being and public health systems. Importantly, while there is not yet

a cure for severe cognitive impairment (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias), extensive

research suggests that adherence to a healthy lifestyle, including maintaining social connections and

contact, may mitigate symptoms or slow progression to dementia (Di Marco et al., 2014; Litke et

al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022). Thus, understanding the roles of loneliness and social isolation in

cognitive aging offers promising avenues for intervention. In the current study, we used a multi-

study approach (i.e., coordinated data analysis) across 11 independent studies to investigate the

individual and adjusted effects of loneliness and social isolation on the risk of cognitive impairment

and mortality, indicators that are paramount to optimal aging and development.

Theoretical and Empirical Distinctions: Loneliness and Social Isolation

Conceptually, loneliness and social isolation are often considered in tandem or used

interchangeably (Perissinotto et al., 2019), yet there are important distinctions between them.

Loneliness is characterized by a feeling of distress arising from a discrepancy between desired and

actual social connection (Smoyak, 1984), regardless of the size or density of an individual’s social

network. Conversely, social isolation is the tangible state of impoverished social contact with others

(Ong et al., 2016). These distinctions have important implications for the pathways through which

they may influence health outcomes, as well as important theoretical implications. In their seminal

discussion of the social psychological theory of loneliness, Peplau and Perlman (1979) highlighted

how loneliness and social isolation are not synonyms, but instead reflect the discrepancy between

desired and achieved level of social interaction. Given individual differences in sociability between

people (Soto & John, 2017), as well as differences in implications of objective versus subjective

indicators of social well-being for health (Fiorillo & Sabatini, 2011), recognizing the distinction

3

between subjective and objective social experiences is essential. That is, the distinction hinges on

perception, wherein loneliness is a feeling of distress that arises alongside perceived social isolation

(Cornwell & Waite, 2009) and social isolation is objectively being alone (Donovan & Blazer, 2020).

Thus, akin to the transactional theory of stress and coping (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), loneliness

may be viewed as resulting from a transactional process between a person and their environment,

whereas social isolation may be viewed as the objective, environmental state. Investigating the

individual and adjusted effects of loneliness and social isolation provides opportunities to examine

the relative importance and interplay between individual differences (loneliness) and environmental

factors (social isolation) in shaping health outcomes (i.e., person-environment interactions).

Notably, loneliness has been conceptualized as a relatively stable individual difference:

some individuals desire more social connections (Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008), and some individuals

are more likely to experience loneliness, regardless of the social environment (Marangoni & Ickes,

1989). Research focusing on daily life experiences of older adults has emphasized the moderating

role of other individual differences in the experience of loneliness, as well as the importance of

research differentiating loneliness and social isolation: although all participants who experienced

social interactions subsequently reported lower momentary loneliness, older adults who were higher

in trait loneliness benefited more (i.e., reported less momentary loneliness) following social

interactions (Zhaoyang et al., 2022). This research is consistent with theories emphasizing that

individuals scoring higher in trait loneliness have heightened hypersensitivity and reactivity to

socially relevant stimuli (Cacioppo et al., 2009), as well as the positive feedback loop between

loneliness and social isolation. Specifically, feelings of loneliness may elicit hypervigilance for

social threats, and the perception of the world as a lonely, unsafe place may prompt lonely

individuals to distance themselves socially, leading to further expectations of negative interactions

accompanied by heightened emotional responses (Hawkley & Cacioppo, 2010). These dynamics

reflect reactive person–environment transactions, in which individual differences in loneliness

4

shape how social environments are interpreted and responded to, with downstream implications for

social isolation. Yet, despite the intimate connection between loneliness and isolation, there are

individual differences in the extent to which individuals perceive loneliness in the context of social

isolation.Thus, appropriately teasing apart the individual and adjusted effects1 of loneliness and social

isolation on health outcomes (i.e., incremental validity), including on the risk of cognitive

impairment and mortality in older adulthood, across several longitudinal studies of aging may

provide opportunities to inform theory and intervention strategies. For instance, interventions

targeting loneliness may focus on management of emotion regulation and perceived stress, whereas

interventions targeting social isolation may focus on lifestyle changes. However, several studies

investigating social isolation have not accounted for loneliness (e.g., Chen et al., 2011; Crooks et

al., 2008; James et al., 2011; Valenzuela et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 1999) and vice versa (e.g., Freak-

Poli et al., 2022; Lobo et al., 2008; Sundström et al., 2020).

The Prevalence of Loneliness and Social Isolation

Loneliness and social isolation can affect individuals of all ages, genders, and cultural

backgrounds. The prevalence of loneliness in older adults varies across cultures and measurement

approaches, with estimates ranging from 10% to 40% (Dykstra, 2009; Ong et al., 2016; Victor et

al., 2000). The prevalence of loneliness is higher among those who are widowed or never married

(Cohen-Mansfield et al., 2016; Dahlberg et al., 2022; Fried et al., 2015) or experience poor health

(Cohen-Mansfield et al., 2016; Dahlberg et al., 2022). Similarly, the prevalence of social isolation is

1 To ensure clarity in our analyses and interpretations, we define our key terms as follows: a) Individual associations: These refer to the relationship between a single predictor (loneliness or social isolation) and an outcome, without adjusting for the other predictor. These associations represent the total effect of each social factor, which may include both direct effects and effects that operate through the other social factor. b) Adjusted associations: These refer to the relationship between a predictor and an outcome while statistically controlling for the other predictor. These associations represent the unique contribution of each social factor, over and above what is shared with the other factor. We chose these terms to avoid potential misconceptions: a) 'Individual' is preferred over 'unique' because the unadjusted associations are not necessarily unique to each predictor, as they may include shared variance. b) 'Adjusted' is preferred over 'independent' because even after statistical adjustment, the predictors may not be truly independent due to their conceptual and empirical overlap.

5

higher for individuals who are retired (Mullins et al., 1991), 65 years and older (Mullins et al.,

1991), or experience chronic pain (Blyth & Noguchi, 2017). Research also finds that self-reported

loneliness and social isolation are more common in older adults with unacknowledged hearing loss

(Mick & Pichora-Fuller, 2016) and communication difficulties and disorders (Palmer et al., 2016).

Thus, many of the factors associated with heightened prevalence of loneliness and social isolation

highlight the importance of identifying, investigating, and delineating ways in which research can

support older adults who are experiencing loneliness and/or social isolation. Given the established

prevalence of loneliness and social isolation among older adults, understanding the extent to which

loneliness and social isolation are predictive risk factors for adverse outcomes is essential from a

public health perspective. In the current project we focus on the extent to which loneliness and

social isolation are associated with cognitive aging processes and mortality risk.

Cognitive Outcomes and Mortality Risk in Older Adulthood

There are extensive individual differences in cognitive functioning in older adulthood,

ranging from what is expected in normal aging to the more progressed state of severe cognitive

impairment (e.g., dementia). Between these ends of the spectrum, mild cognitive impairment (MCI)

is used to characterize or diagnose individuals who report cognitive complaints and decline that is

not severe enough to interfere with day-to-day activities or warrant a dementia diagnosis (Petersen

et al., 1999). In other words, older adults can be categorized as having 1) no cognitive impairment,

2\) mildly impaired cognitive functioning (e.g., MCI), or 3) severely impaired cognitive functioning

(e.g., dementia)2 (see Supplementary Text 1 for a Glossary of cognitive terms and mapping of

2 Mildly impaired cognitive functioning is a primary symptom of MCI, while severely impaired cognitive functioning is a primary symptom of dementia. The terms MCI and dementia typically reflect clinical diagnoses, though some researchers will operationalize MCI or dementia based on performance on cognitive tests. When we refer to the current project (including research questions, hypotheses, and analytic approaches), we use the terms “mildly impaired cognitive functioning” and “severely impaired cognitive functioning” rather than “MCI” and “dementia”, as not all of the datasets meeting eligibility involved clinical MCI or dementia diagnoses. That is, although some datasets included clinical diagnoses based on clinical conferences (e.g., Rush MAP), we will conceptually harmonize cognitive status categories at the lowest possible denominator (i.e., mildly impaired and severely impaired cognitive functioning). When we refer to previous research investigating cognitive outcomes, we use the terminology that was originally used (e.g., when researchers investigated the “risk of MCI” or the “risk of dementia”) to more accurately reflect the outcomes reported in the literature.

6

cognitive status categories to cognitive terms). Transitioning between these cognitive status

categories is not necessarily a linear process. Specifically, MCI (i.e., mildly impaired cognitive

functioning) increases the risk of dementia (i.e., severely impaired cognitive functioning) (see

Bruscoli & Lovestone, 2004), but not all individuals with MCI will progress to dementia

(Kaduszkiewicz et al., 2014; Visser et al., 2006). For instance, in a population-based cohort of older

adults (N=2050), only 29% of individuals with prevalent or incident MCI progressed to dementia

over a median follow-up of 5 years (Roberts et al., 2014). However, compared to individuals with

no cognitive impairment, individuals with MCI had a substantially elevated risk of dementia

(Hazard Ratio \[HR\]=23.2, 95% Confidence Interval \[CI\] \[14.4, 37.2\]) (Roberts et al., 2014).

Individuals with mildly impaired cognitive functioning may also revert to no cognitive

impairment (Roberts et al., 2014). Based on older adults with MCI (N=567), 7% reverted to no

cognitive impairment when assessed two years later (Welstead et al., 2021). Yet individuals who do

revert to no cognitive impairment (i.e., transition backward) still remain at higher risk of incident

dementia (Koepsell & Monsell, 2012). The increased risk of dementia is approximately 6.6-fold in

individuals who were diagnosed with MCI and reverted back to no cognitive impairment compared

to individuals who never received an MCI diagnosis, suggesting that mildly impaired cognitive

functioning has critical prognostic implications for eventual dementia diagnosis (Koepsell &

Monsell, 2012).

Finally, cognitive impairment also increases the risk of mortality (Rajan et al., 2014;

Taniguchi et al., 2019; Wilson et al., 2006), and the risk of both cognitive impairment and mortality

increase alongside older age. These age-related links between cognitive impairment and mortality

emphasize the importance of simultaneously accounting for both cognitive outcomes and mortality

risk when investigating the effect of predictive factors on any of these outcomes. That is,

longitudinal panel datasets repeatedly assess participants across several years, while also tracking

participant deaths during follow-up occasions (and sometimes beyond). Using these longitudinal

7

datasets, the majority of the existing literature treats the risk of mildly impaired cognitive

functioning (e.g., MCI), severely impaired cognitive functioning (e.g., dementia), and mortality as

individual outcomes. However, cognitive aging processes and mortality are competing risks,

especially in old age. To summarize: 1) individuals with mildly impaired cognitive functioning are

at a greater risk of severely impaired cognitive functioning, 2) individuals with mildly or severely

impaired cognitive functioning are at a greater risk of mortality, 3) individuals may die due to

alternative causes prior to development of cognitive impairment, and 4) increasing age is a risk

factor for cognitive impairment and mortality. Given this issue of heightened risk among cognitive

outcomes and selective mortality, research investigating the impact of predictors (e.g., loneliness

and social isolation) on any of these outcomes (e.g., mildly impaired cognitive functioning, severely

impaired cognitive functioning, or death) in singularity is not properly accounting for the competing

risks of the other outcome, which may lead to biased estimates.

Yet, most research does not consider or account for more than one outcome. For instance,

out of 16 cohort studies examining loneliness and dementia systematically identified by Qiao et al.

(2022), only one study statistically examined both cognitive decline and mortality; specifically,

Tilvis et al. (2004) found that loneliness was not associated with the relative risk of mortality when

adjusting for cognitive functioning at baseline and age-related cognitive decline. Thus, it is possible

that the increased risk of mortality in individuals experiencing heightened loneliness may be

accounted for, at least partially, by cognitive decline in older adulthood.

Empirical Research: Loneliness, Social Isolation, Cognitive Aging, and Mortality Risk

A rich body of empirical research has investigated whether loneliness and social isolation

are associated with the risk of cognitive outcomes in older adulthood. Based on up to 65 reports,

meta-analyses find consistent associations between higher loneliness or social isolation with

impairment across several domains of cognitive functioning (see Boss et al., 2015; Evans et al.,

2019; Kang & Oremus, 2022). Similarly, based on up to 77 independent studies, meta-analyses

8

revealed that social connectedness and social contact are inversely associated with cognitive decline

(see Kuiper et al., 2015; Piolatto et al., 2022; Samtani et al., 2022). While most studies find an

inverse association between social isolation and cognitive function (e.g., Evans et al., 2018), some

research has failed to find this relationship (e.g., Wilson et al., 2007). These conflicting findings

may be due to differences in measurement approaches or sample characteristics, which our multi-

study approach aims to address. Further, although these associations are reliable, effect sizes are

relatively small (e.g., the association between loneliness and global cognitive functioning, r= -0.08;

95% CI \[-0.14, -0.02\], K=6; Harrington et al., 2023). Findings between social isolation and risk of

dementia are similarly consistent (see also Fratiglioni et al., 2004). Based on meta-analyses of

longitudinal studies, poor social engagement (k=17, see Penninkilampi et al., 2018) and living alone

(i.e., social isolation) (k=12, see Desai et al., 2020) were associated with an increased risk of

incident dementia. Overall, these findings suggest that both loneliness and social isolation are

reliable risk factors for cognitive impairment and cognitive decline, and that social isolation is

reliably linked with the risk of dementia.

Despite the reliable associations between loneliness and cognitive functioning and decline,

the association between loneliness and the risk of dementia, however, appears to be less congruent.

For instance, Victor et al. (2021) concluded that there is insufficient evidence for loneliness as a

risk factor for dementia, as earlier loneliness predicted incident dementia in only five out of eleven

studies. In contrast, Qiao et al. (2022) (k=16) concluded that loneliness was consistently associated

with an increased risk of dementia, but not risk of MCI (2022). Similarly, recent research based on

a large sample of adults from the UK Biobank (N=492,322; Mage=57, SD=8) found that loneliness

was associated with a 60% increased risk of several types of dementia, adjusting for social isolation

(Sutin et al., 2022). However, two additional reports using the same dataset but with different

operationalizations of loneliness and social isolation and shorter follow-up periods found that the

increased risk of loneliness on dementia was no longer significant after adjusting for social isolation

9

(Elovainio et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2022). Thus, consistent with theory emphasizing the importance

of distinguishing between loneliness and social isolation (e.g., Peplau & Perlman, 1979), the extent

to which loneliness is associated with risk of dementia when adjusting for social isolation appears

to be less consistent compared to the effect of loneliness or social isolation on cognitive impairment

or decline, or the effect of social isolation on risk of dementia. Moreover, these studies emphasize

the challenge of delineating the extent to which mixed findings reflect true differences versus

methodological differences.

Given the associations between loneliness and social isolation with detrimental cognitive

and health outcomes, it is understandable that both loneliness and social isolation are also robustly

and consistently associated with mortality risk (Crowe et al., 2021; Henriksen et al., 2019; Holt-

Lunstad et al., 2010; Long et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2012; Steptoe et al., 2013). The landmark meta-

analysis by Holt-Lunstad et al. (2015), which included data from 70 independent studies, found that

social isolation is associated with a 29% increase in mortality risk, loneliness is associated with a

26% increase in mortality risk, and living alone is associated with a 32% increase in mortality risk.

However, the authors emphasized that the vast majority of studies examined either loneliness,

social isolation, or living alone, thereby limiting direct comparisons between these predictors. Of

the studies that did contrast loneliness and social isolation, results have been mixed, with some

finding that loneliness (Holwerda et al., 2012) or social isolation (Steptoe et al., 2013) was a more

important indicator of mortality risk.

Theoretical Pathways: Loneliness, Social Isolation, Cognitive Aging, and Mortality Risk

Theory and empirical research show that some of the pathways linking loneliness and social

isolation to cognitive aging and mortality risk may be overlapping and bidirectional (del Pozo Cruz

et al., 2021; Luo & Waite, 2014; Shankar, 2017). Specifically, cognitive decline may exacerbate

loneliness and social isolation, as individuals experiencing cognitive impairment may feel lonelier

and/or isolate themselves (Gibson & Springer, 2022; Yu et al., 2016). Similarly, both may

10

accelerate aging and cognitive impairment (Berkman, 1988; Crowe et al., 2021; Hawkley &

Cacioppo, 2010; Kuiper et al., 2015), as social activity and social relationships are important for

maintaining cognitive functioning (Fratiglioni et al., 2004; Park et al., 2022; Penninkilampi et al.,

2018). Additionally, both loneliness and social isolation may adversely affect health status, which

can subsequently influence the risk of cognitive decline, dementia, and mortality. For instance,

having a limited social network (i.e., social isolation) may adversely influence macrosocial forces

important for healthy cognitive aging, including access to resources and social support (Holwerda et

al., 2014). Individuals who are lonely or socially isolated are also more likely to engage in

detrimental health behaviours (e.g., smoking, poor sleep quality, poor diet, low physical activity)

(Christiansen et al., 2016; Kobayashi & Steptoe, 2018), leading to the increased risk of dementia

(see Lee et al., 2010) and mortality (see Loef & Walach, 2012).

Extensive research also documents unique pathways linking loneliness and social isolation

with cognitive outcomes and mortality risk in older adulthood. Specifically, loneliness may impact

cognitive health and mortality via: a) Heightened stress reactivity: Lonely individuals often

experience chronic activation of stress response systems, leading to elevated cortisol levels and

inflammatory markers (Hackett et al., 2012). b) Altered cognitive processes: Loneliness is

associated with heightened attention to social threats and negative social information, which may

contribute to cognitive load and reduced cognitive resources for other tasks (Cacioppo et al., 2009).

c) Sleep disruption: Loneliness is linked to poor sleep quality (Hawkley et al., 2010), which is a risk

factor for cognitive decline and mortality. d) Health behaviors: Lonely individuals may be less

likely to engage in health-promoting behaviors, such as physical activity or seeking medical care

(Shankar et al., 2011). Longitudinal studies also show a bidirectional link between loneliness and

cognitive decline in older adults, with loneliness predicting faster cognitive decline and cognitive

impairment increasing feelings of loneliness over time (Boss et al., 2015; Lara et al., 2019).

11

On the other hand, social isolation may influence cognitive health and mortality via: a)

Reduced cognitive stimulation: a lack of social interaction may lead to decreased cognitive

engagement and lower cognitive reserve (Fratiglioni et al., 2004). b) Limited access to resources:

Socially isolated individuals may have reduced access to health information, healthcare services,

and practical support for daily living (Berkman & Glass, 2000). c) Physiological effects: Social

isolation has been linked to increased blood pressure and poorer immune function, which may

contribute to cognitive decline and mortality risk (Courtin & Knapp, 2017). d) Lack of social

control: Without regular social contact, there may be less external motivation to maintain healthy

behaviors or adhere to medical treatments (Umberson, 1987). These pathways align with the

cognitive reserve hypothesis (Stern, 2009), which posits that engaging in social activities may build

cognitive resilience, potentially delaying the onset of dementia symptoms.

Together, this extensive literature highlights the crucial need to examine the individual and

adjusted links between loneliness and social isolation with cognitive outcomes and mortality risk.

It's also important to note that loneliness and social isolation may interact in their effects on health

outcomes. For instance, the impact of social isolation on cognition might be exacerbated by feelings

of loneliness, or conversely, the stress-related effects of loneliness might be buffered by

maintaining some level of social contact. By examining the individual and adjusted effects of

loneliness and social isolation on cognitive status and mortality, our study aims to disentangle these

potentially distinct pathways. This approach permits opportunities to clarify whether interventions

should focus on addressing subjective feelings of loneliness, improving objective social

connections, or both, to most effectively promote cognitive health and longevity in older adulthood.

The Current Project

Together, the literature suggests that: 1) higher loneliness and social isolation are linked to

greater risk of cognitive impairment and decline; 2) higher social isolation is linked to an increased

risk of dementia, but the impact of loneliness on the risk of dementia is less conclusive; 3) the links

12

between loneliness or social isolation with the risk of mild cognitive impairment is less clear; and 4)

higher loneliness and social isolation are associated with greater mortality risk. However, in many

cases, conclusions are complicated as research focuses solely on either loneliness or social

isolation. Specifically, a great deal of this work does not consider both loneliness and social

isolation, does not model loneliness and social isolation together, does not distinguish the subjective

versus objective aspects of social isolation, varies in the reliability of measures assessing loneliness

and social isolation, and/or aggregates assessments of loneliness and social isolation. Studies that

have considered both factors highlight the importance of delineating the relative contributions of

each (Freak-Poli et al., 2022; Joyce et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2016). Furthermore, the

vast majority of research investigating the effect of loneliness or social isolation on cognitive

outcomes or mortality risk has not accounted for the competing risk of the other outcome(s), which

may result in biased estimates. That is, cognitive outcomes are strongly associated with mortality

risk (see subsection 'Cognitive Outcomes and Mortality Risk in Older Adulthood'). Importantly,

omitting key confounds (e.g., ignoring death as a competing risk factor) when investigating

correlates of cognitive aging processes can result in biased estimates and/or may obscure the

individual associations. Our approach of examining both outcomes simultaneously provides a more

comprehensive understanding of the aging process. Moreover, the timing of when loneliness and

social isolation may have the most substantial effect on the progression through cognitive

functioning states is unclear.

In the current project, we used Cox proportional hazard models, logistic regression, and

multistate survival models to systematically delineate the individual and adjusted associations

between loneliness, social isolation, cognitive outcomes, and mortality risk. Understanding the

relative contributions of loneliness and social isolation to cognitive outcomes and mortality risk is

crucial for several reasons: a) Theoretical advancement: By examining these constructs

simultaneously, we can better understand whether the subjective experience of loneliness or the

13

objective state of social isolation has a stronger impact on health outcomes in older adults; b)

Intervention development: Clarifying the unique effects of loneliness and social isolation can

inform more targeted and effective interventions. For instance, if loneliness shows stronger

associations with cognitive decline, interventions might focus more on cognitive reframing and

emotional support. Conversely, if social isolation is more impactful, interventions might prioritize

increasing objective social contacts; and c) Resource allocation: In a context of limited public

health resources, understanding which aspect of social disconnection most strongly predicts adverse

outcomes can guide more efficient allocation. Our study's design, which examines both the

individual and adjusted effects of loneliness and social isolation across multiple datasets, is

specifically tailored to address these important questions about the relative contributions. See Table

1 for a 2x2 mapping of our first four research questions (RQs), analytic approach, hypotheses, and

number of models and effects of interest.

Moreover, between-study and between-review variability in statistical approach and

operational definitions of loneliness and social isolation has further complicated conclusions drawn

from previous research, in addition to hindering theory development. In response, we applied a

coordinated data analysis methodological framework (Graham et al., 2022; Hofer & Piccinin, 2010;

Willroth et al., 2022; Yoneda, 2025). Using this approach, independent but identical models (to the

extent possible) were fit to 11 longitudinal aging studies. Coordinated data analysis is particularly

well positioned to address idiosyncrasies across a set of findings by ensuring that statistical models

and adjustment of covariates are held constant, permitting opportunities to explore how differences

in operational definitions (e.g., loneliness assessed via multi-item scales versus single items) may

influence the magnitude and reliability of associations. Furthermore, this approach facilitates the

evaluation of robustness and generalizability, while preserving significant heterogeneity across

datasets. Notably, a common theme across the numerous systematic reviews is an emphasis on the

extensive heterogeneity across study designs, analytic approaches, and operational definitions of

14

key constructs, thereby complicating between-study comparisons. This between-study variability

underscores the importance of research that harmonizes across as many critical study features as

possible.

Table 1

Individual predictors Adjusted predictors

Individual

outcomes

RQ1: Is loneliness or social isolation

individually associated with the risk of severely

impaired cognition or death?

Analysis: Cox and Logistic regression,

separate models for loneliness and social

isolation, and for risk of severe cognitive

impairment and for risk of death (4 models)

Hypotheses: Loneliness and social

isolation will be individually associated with the

risk of severe cognitive impairment and the risk

of deathNumber of effect sizes: k=4

RQ2: Is loneliness or social isolation

independently associated with the risk of

severely impaired cognition or death?

Analysis: Cox and Logistic regression,

including both loneliness and social isolation for

risk of severe cognitive impairment, and for risk

of death (2 models)

Hypotheses: Social isolation will be a

more robust predictor of severe cognitive

impairment, when adjusting for loneliness

Number of effect sizes: k=4

15

Adjusted

outcomes

Research Questions 1–4 with Associated Analytic Approach, Hypotheses, and Number of Effect Sizes

Note. RQ=Research Question; MSM= Multistate Survival Model; Number of effect sizes represent the

number of individual meta-analyses we will fit per research question.

Method

The current study was completed via secondary analysis of existing datasets that were either

public and de-identified prior to our access to them or we completed a data use agreement that

provided access to the requisite data to complete the analyses (see Supplementary Table 1). Under

RQ3: Is loneliness or social isolation

individually associated with risk of transitioning

to mildly or severely impaired cognitive states

and/or risk of death?

Analysis: MSM (cognitive outcomes and

mortality), separate models for loneliness and

social isolation (2 models)

Hypotheses: Loneliness and social

isolation will be individually associated with the

risk of transitioning forward through cognitive

status categories, when accounting for death

Number of effect sizes: k=14

RQ4: Are loneliness and social isolation

independently associated with risk of

transitioning to mildly or severely impaired

cognitive states and/or risk of death?

Analysis: MSM (cognitive outcomes and

mortality), including both loneliness and social

isolation (1 model)

Hypotheses: Social isolation will be a

more robust predictor of transitioning forward

through cognitive status categories, when

accounting for death and for loneliness

Number of effect sizes: k=14

16

the study title “Advancing the Study of Social Isolation, Loneliness, and Cognitive Functioning in

Older Adults Through the Use of Integrative Data Analysis”, the Northwestern University

Biomedical Institutional Review Board confirmed that this project constitutes non-human subject

research and does not require a protocol.

Research Questions and Hypotheses

Our study addresses four primary research questions (RQs), and corresponding hypotheses3,

examining the relationships between loneliness, social isolation, cognitive status, and mortality risk

(see Table 1 and Supplementary Text 2 for a full description). Across these RQs, we report the

model estimates including sociodemographic covariates (age, sex, and education). Finally, in

addition to these four primary research questions, we asked how depressive symptoms impact the

associations between loneliness, social isolation, cognitive functioning, and death (RQ5). To

address this question, we repeated all analyses from RQ’s 1-4 further adjusting for depressive

symptoms. Together, these research questions assist in addressing the theoretical and empirical

question of whether loneliness and social isolation represent distinct constructs that are individually

or incrementally important for health outcomes in older adulthood (see also Lawson & Robins,

2021). Given the conceptual similarities and differences between loneliness and social isolation

(i.e., perceived isolation versus objective isolation), the individual effects of either (RQ’s 1 & 3)

represent the importance of poor social health in general for cognitive outcomes and mortality risk.

That is, although loneliness and social isolation are conceptually distinct, we suspect that the

investigation of loneliness not accounting for social isolation likely still includes some variability

related to social isolation, and vice versa. Conversely, the adjusted effects of loneliness (i.e.,

adjusting for social isolation, RQ’s 2 & 4) reflect the extent to which individual differences in

perceived loneliness are associated with cognitive outcomes and/or mortality risk, considering the

3 A full written explanation of the research questions and hypotheses are included in Supplementary Text 2. This content was originally included in the Registered Report that was accepted in principle, but to streamline the primary manuscript, was moved to the supplement as the content overlaps directly with the information reported in Table 1.

17

extent to which individuals report being objectively alone. Likewise, the adjusted effects of social

isolation (i.e., adjusting for loneliness, RQ’s 2 & 4) reflect the extent to which being objectively

alone is associated with cognitive outcomes and mortality risk, accounting for the extent to which

individuals are bothered by being alone.

As recommended by Lawson and Robins (2021), researchers should test the individual

importance of a construct by including both sibling constructs in a prediction model and having

them “compete” to explain variance in a wide range of outcomes. Here, we tested the links between

loneliness and social isolation (sibling constructs) and several related outcomes relevant to older

adult health, independence, and well-being (risk of mildly and severely impaired cognitive

functioning; risk of death; seven transitions between no cognitive impairment, mildly impaired

cognitive functioning, severely impaired cognitive functioning, and death). Further, we tested these

associations across a wide range of datasets (K=11), which, in a similar vein, permitted the ability

to evaluate the replicability and robustness across datasets. Given previous research, we expected

that higher levels of loneliness and social isolation would be associated with a greater likelihood of

severe cognitive impairment and of death, as well as transitioning forward through cognitive status

categories and to death. Moreover, we expected that, compared to loneliness, higher social isolation

would be a more robust indicator of severe cognitive impairment and of death, as well as

transitioning forward through cognitive status categories and to death. As previous research has not

yet investigated whether loneliness or social isolation are associated with the backward transition

from mildly impaired cognitive functioning back to no impaired cognitive functioning, we did not

make predictions for the impact of loneliness or social isolation on backward transitions (i.e.,

analyses examining these specific transitions were exploratory). We acknowledge that while the

deleterious effects of loneliness and social isolation likely apply to many health outcomes in older

adulthood, our focus on cognitive status and mortality allows for a manageable and interpretable

18

multistate modelling approach; adding additional health states would significantly increase model

complexity and potentially reduce our ability to draw clear conclusions.

DesignTo address our research questions and hypotheses, we used several modelling approaches

(Cox regression, logistic regression, and multi-state survival models). Multistate survival modelling

not only accounts for the issue of selective mortality in longitudinal datasets, but our

comprehensive approach (also using Cox and logistic model) provides opportunities to tease apart

the extent to which associations are impacted by accounting for death. See Figure 1 for a visual

depiction of the possible transitions between cognitive status categories and death modelled by the

multistate survival models.

Figure 1 Possible Transitions between Cognitive Status Categories and Death in the Four-State Model

Note. N values represent the sum of the observed transitions of each type across all included datasets. Each participant may represent multiple transitions (i.e., participants may make multiple transitions during the study period).We used a coordinated data analysis framework, including meta-analysis as a final step to

synthesize our findings. This approach permits evaluation of the replicability across many large

longitudinal datasets with varying start times, countries of origin, design features, and measurement

tools, while preserving important individual dataset variability. However, applying a coordinated

data analysis approach, in combination with the complex nature of multistate survival models,

19

required us to limit the covariates and mediators included in models. For instance, investigating the

role of culture and race is important, particularly in light of research suggesting that cognitive aging

processes may develop differently across Black and Mexican American populations in the US

(Mehta & Yeo, 2017). Yet many of the samples meeting eligibility for the current project are

racially homogenous. Thus, to maximize harmonization across analyses, we did not examine racial

differences; however, we report prevalence of race within each dataset when race data were

available (see Supplementary Table 3). The SHARE datasets do not have race data; instead, we

report country of birth as the closest possible proxy (see Supplementary Table 4).

Datasets were identified using the Integrative Analysis of Longitudinal Studies of Aging and

Dementia (maelstrom-research.org/network/ialsa) and the Gateway To Global Aging (g2aging.org)

platforms. Across these two sites, we searched for long-term longitudinal studies that contained the

minimum required data for inclusion in the proposed analyses. At a minimum, datasets were

required to have 1) at least one measurement occasion of loneliness (e.g., “how lonely do you feel”)

prior to or at the same measurement occasion of assessments of cognitive function, 2) at least one

measurement occasion of social isolation containing multiple items assessing quantity or

frequencies of social contact (i.e., “how often do you meet with friends/family?”, “do you live

alone?”, “do you frequently attend social events?”) prior to or at the same measurement occasion of

assessments of cognitive function, 3) at least five measurement occasions of cognitive functioning

performance or an evaluation of cognitive status (i.e., dementia, MCI), and 4) a measurement of

mortality that includes death status and death date.

20

Sampling plan

We used data from 11 longitudinal studies4 (detailed below). These datasets are either

publicly available or access can be requested directly from the study sites, with the exception of

ELSA death data (see Supplementary Table 1). Data were downloaded following in-principle

acceptance of this Registered Report.

English Longitudinal Study of Aging (ELSA)

ELSA is a nationally representative longitudinal sample of English adults aged 50 and older

living in private households (Clemens et al., 2019). The study began in 2002-2003, with core

interviews repeated every two years for a total of eight waves. We used data starting in wave 8

(2016) when cognitive assessments began (analytic N=14,086).

Health and Retirement Study (HRS)

HRS is a representative panel study of United States retirees aged 51 and over. Data

collection was initiated in 1992 and occurred approximately every two years (Sonnega et al., 2014).

Data were used from the eight waves of measurement that occurred since 2002, when the relevant

psychosocial data collection began (analytic N=37,826).

Origins of Variances in the Oldest-Old: Octogenarian Twins (OCTO-Twin)

OCTO-Twin is a sample from the Swedish population-based twin registry (McClearn et al.,

1997). At study initiation, twin pairs were enrolled if they were born in 1913 or earlier and both

twins consented to participation. A total of 351 twin pairs were enrolled (N = 702) in 1991, and new

waves of data collection occurred every two years until 2002 (when the majority of the sample was

deceased) for a total of five measurement occasions included in analysis (analytic N=697).

4 When we registered this report, we thought that The Household, Income, and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey and The German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) met our eligibility criteria. Similarly, we believed that Luxembourg from SHARE met eligibility. While all three of these datasets measure hundreds of variables repeatedly, upon data access we found that they did not include the measurement of variables necessary for the current project (e.g., due to timing) and were therefore excluded. See Supplementary Table 2 for registration deviations.

21

The Swedish Adoption/Twin Study of Aging (SATSA)

SATSA is a long-term longitudinal study aimed at investigating gerontological genetics

(Pedersen et al., 1991). The original sample, first collected in 1984, consisted of pairs of twins

reared apart, matched with control pairs of twins reared together (total N = 3,838). Data collection

occurred approximately every three years, for a total of nine waves of data available for analysis

(analytic N=1,836).

Survey of Health, Ageing, and Retirement in Europe (SHARE)

SHARE is a panel survey of older adults aged 50 and over who live in private households,

across all 26 countries of the EU, Switzerland, and Israel (Borsch-Supan et al., 2013). The survey

began in 2004 with new data collection occurring every two years, for a total of up to nine waves.

Of the 26 countries, 16 met eligibility for the current project, as they included at least five waves of

data. We executed analyses using SHARE datasets independently in four groups of countries, based

on geopolitical grounds and by broad category of welfare state, consistent with previous research

(Solé-Auró & Gumà, 2023): 1) Northern European (analytic N=13,898): Denmark and Sweden; 2)

Central European (analytic N=42,423): Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and

Switzerland; 3) Southern European (analytic N=25,776): Greece, Italy, and Spain; 4) Eastern

European (analytic N=30,670): Czech Republic, Estonia, Poland, and Slovenia. Israel was analyzed

independently, as it cannot be grouped within European regions (analytic N=4,653). Thus, SHARE

represents independent analyses across five datasets (analytic Ntotal=117,420).

Rush Memory and Aging Project (MAP)

MAP is a longitudinal epidemiological cohort study that began in 1997 focusing on

common chronic conditions, decline in cognitive and motor function, and risk of AD and related

dementias (Bennett et al., 2012). Participants were older adults recruited from retirement

communities, subsidized senior housing facilities, church groups, and social service agencies in

northeastern Illinois. All participants agreed to annual clinical evaluation and organ donation. It was

22

approved by an Institutional Review Board of Rush University Medical Center and all participants

signed informed and repository consents and an Anatomic Gift Act. Data were available for up to

20 measurement occasions (analytic N=2,356).

Minority Aging Research Study (MARS)

MARS is a longitudinal epidemiologic cohort study of cognitive decline and risk of AD in

older African Americans, beginning in 2004 (Barnes et al., 2012). Participants are African

American adults aged 65+ years. At study enrollment, participants had no known dementia, agreed

to annual clinical evaluation and blood draw, and (optionally) consented to brain donation after

death. All participants signed an informed consent and consented to share data; a subset signed an

Anatomic Gift Act. Data were available for up to 12 measurement occasions (analytic N=849).

Transparency and Openness

Each dataset used is cited in the text with appropriate marker papers and listed in the

reference section. Analytic methods and program packages are appropriately cited in the text and

listed in the reference section. Data Transparency: Data used for the current study are either

publicly available to qualified users or available after completing data use agreements5. Specific

information about accessibility for each dataset is included in the text and in Supplementary Table

1\. All research materials, including analytic plan, instructions to analysts, deviations and

justifications, and analytic code, are available on the OSF project page (URL:

https://osf.io/vqyeu/overview?view\_only=d67be59fefb94c269cb4f356fc0dd968). All data decisions

were made prior to data access or analysis. See Supplementary Table 2 for all deviations and

decisions that were made after seeing the data (Willroth & Atherton, 2024). After In Principle

Acceptance, we posted the manuscript on the OSF as a pre-registration

(https://osf.io/vqyeu/files/osfstorage).

5 One exception to this is for ELSA death data. Although ELSA data are mostly publicly available, after in-principle acceptance of this Registered Report, death data in ELSA were no longer available (publicly or by request) due to new government privacy laws. Therefore, an internal ELSA analyst was invited to fit the models on site (co-author PQ).

23

Prior Exposure to Data

To increase transparency regarding prior exposure to these data, Supplementary Table 5

reports existing publications and manuscripts (K=103) that included co-authors of the current

project using the same dataset(s). The table also provides details regarding primary differences

between the current study and the existing report/publication. The existing projects include data

from ELSA (k=8), HRS (k=17), OCTO (k=10), SATSA (k=5), SHARE (k=1), and Rush MAP

(k=24). In addition, our group has (co)authored several coordinated data analyses (k=38) including

the datasets that meet eligibility criteria. The table emphasizes that co-authors of the proposed

project have been involved in several existing projects using the datasets that meet eligibility to

investigate loneliness, social isolation, cognition, and mortality. However, none of these projects

included investigation of all four of the current primary variables and none including loneliness or

social isolation have used multistate survival models. Importantly, the researcher decisions

regarding operational definitions of the primary independent and dependent variables are clearly

justified based on previous research and the harmonization approach is consistent across datasets.

VariablesWe aimed to conceptually harmonize all variables across studies. This approach allowed us

to conduct comparable analyses across datasets while maintaining awareness of the underlying

differences in assessment. In our results, we present both dataset-specific results and pooled,

synthesized results to allow examination of potential systematic differences.

Cognitive Status Categories

We followed a decision tree for operational definitions of cognitive status categories in

which we maximized available data and preserved the strength of studies. Specifically, the highest

preference of cognitive status information was based on a clinical diagnosis of MCI and dementia,

followed by the Clinical Dementia Rating scale, followed by traditional assessments used by

medical professionals to screen for cognitive impairment (e.g., the Mini Mental State Examination),

24

followed by composites of cognitive test scores (see Supplementary Text 3 for more details).

Supplementary Table 6 provides a comprehensive overview of how cognitive status is assessed and

harmonized across all included datasets, including operation definition of each cognitive status

category. As shown, there is considerable variation in the original measures used, ranging from

clinical diagnoses to specific cognitive test batteries. Our harmonization process aimed to create

comparable categories across studies while respecting the integrity of each dataset's original

assessment approach. We recognize that perfect equivalence across datasets is not achievable due to

inherent differences in assessment methods. For instance, clinical diagnosis-based categorizations

(e.g., in MAP) may not be directly comparable to categories based on cognitive test scores (e.g., in

ELSA). We address this limitation by using language reflecting broad categories (no impairment,

mild impairment, severe impairment) that can be reasonably applied across diverse assessment

methods. Furthermore, we clearly document the original criteria and our harmonization decisions

for each dataset.6

Loneliness

For each study, loneliness items were pulled from every available occasion of measurement.

Multi-item scales were summed, where higher scores reflect more loneliness. Summed scores were

then standardized using Percent of Maximum Possible (POMP) scoring (Cohen et al., 1999), scaled

from 0 to 10 to aid in interpretation and convergence. Specifically,

POMP = \[(observed score - min possible score) / (max possible score - min possible

score)\] x 10

6 For datasets in which categories are defined based on cognitive test cut off scores (ELSA, HILDA, SOEP, and each country in SHARE), we required that the summed cognitive tests can be clearly delineated into cognitive status categories. Specifically, previous research (Yoneda et al., 2020) found that the range of summed cognitive test scores were not normally distributed in two countries (Spain and Italy) from SHARE, such that the majority of individuals fell within a range too close to 0 (in raw scores) to distinguish cognitive states based on standard deviations. We did not expect this to be an issue for the majority of datasets (ELSA, HILDA, SOEP, and most countries in SHARE: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Switzerland); however, we acknowledged that this could be an issue in some of the countries from SHARE (Czech Republic, Poland, Estonia, and Slovenia). In the case that we could not clearly delineate the cognitive status categories in an individual dataset, we planned to exclude the dataset, but delineation of cognitive categories was possible in all datasets (possibly because countries were pooled to reflect regions in Europe).

25

POMP scoring in this context is preferred over z-standardization, as it preserves differences

in variation across samples. To improve comparability across datasets, we also POMP scored the

response options for any study that only had a single item of loneliness. Notably, POMP scoring

allows for optimal comparability across studies, regardless of whether they use multi-item scales or

single items. See Supplementary Table 7 for available loneliness items and operational definition

for each included dataset.

Social Isolation

For each study, social isolation items were pulled from every available occasion of

measurement. We harmonized social isolation items to the extent possible across datasets using the

approach reported by Shanker et al. (2011) as a guide. Notably, the operational definition of social

isolation varies extensively across studies, even when studies use the same dataset. For example,

across 32 existing publications using the ELSA dataset, social isolation has been operationalized 20

unique ways. The most common approach was originally reported by Shanker et al. (2011), in

which participants were given one point for endorsing any of the following five items: 1) if they

were not married/not cohabiting with a partner; 2) had less than monthly contact (including face-to-

face, telephone, or written/email contact) with children; 3) had less than monthly contact other

immediate family; 4) had less than monthly contact with friends; and 5) if they did not participate in

any organizations, religious groups, or committees. Using this approach, scores ranged from 0 - 4,

with higher scores indicating greater social isolation. This approach was used in 12/32 studies

(38%) and a further 14 (44%) of the existing reports applied slight variations of Shanker et al.’s

(2011) approach.

Given t