xx xxxxxxxx

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

Psychedelic medicine: mechanisms, evidence, and translation to practice

Edward Jacobs,1 Zarmeen Zahid,1 Jared Hinkle,2 Sandeep Nayak,1 David B Yaden1

ABSTRACT

1Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns

Over the past 15 years, psychedelic treatments have garnered substantial clinical interest, with psilocybin and 3,4‑methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) advancing to phase 3 trials for various psychiatric conditions. This state‑of‑the‑art Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

review examines the evidence for these treatments and their proposed mechanisms

2Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore,

the bmj | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 1

of action, and identifies key challenges in clinical translation. Psychedelic treatments combine limited drug administration with psychotherapy or psychological support, MD, USA Correspondence to: D Yaden dyaden1@jhmi.edu

potentially working through various biological and psychological pathways, including effects on neural circuitry, emotional processing, and psychological flexibility, though Cite this as: BMJ 2026;392:e081723 http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/

the precise mechanisms are not completely understood. The strongest evidence

bmj‑2024‑081723

supports psilocybin for treatment resistant depression and MDMA for post‑traumatic Series explanation: State of the Art Reviews are commissioned on the basis of their relevance to academics and specialists in the US and internationally.

stress disorder, with emerging data in substance use disorders and psychological distress in life threatening illness. Although psychedelics are well tolerated under controlled conditions, methodological limitations complicate interpretation of the evidence, including functional unblinding, variable psychotherapeutic protocols, and homogeneous trial populations. Current treatment models require extensive therapeutic support in specialized settings, posing challenges with scalability. While innovative approaches like group administration may improve accessibility, their comparative effectiveness remains to be established. Future priorities for the research field include standardizing adverse event assessment, developing evidence based implementation guidelines, and showing durable benefit in diverse patient populations. Whether psychedelic treatments can fulfil their therapeutic promise while meeting regulatory requirements and healthcare system constraints remains a defining question for the field.

Introduction The past 15 years have seen surging research and clinical interest in psychedelic therapies, driven by promising results with psilocybin and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). Both substances have shown possible applications across several conditions, including affective disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and substance use disorders. Encouraging early outcomes have led to several breakthrough therapy designations by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Given limited pharmacotherapy innovation in recent decades, these preliminary findings have generated substantial, though often premature,1 interest and excitement.

Some argue that enthusiasm for psychedelics has outpaced evidence quality. Critics cite methodo- logical limitations, potential safety concerns, and risks of lowered regulatory standards through expedited approval.2 The tension between clinical

need and robust evidence is exemplified by the recent FDA rejection of the license application by Lykos Therapeutics for MDMA assisted therapy in PTSD, underscoring ongoing debate about trial design and evidence quality.3 4

Although “classic” psychedelics like psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) are pharmacologically distinct from “entactogens” or “empathogens” such as MDMA, both share striking, rapid onset subjective effects and prolonged impacts on behavior and cognition well after metabolism. Both are used in a distinctive treatment model (fig 1, fig 2). Rather than daily dosing, psychedelics are administered one to three times within a sequence of preparatory, drug administration, and integration sessions to reflect on the experience (fig 1, fig 2).

These features create challenges across several domains. Methodological issues include the pronounced subjective effects that compromise study blinding, while the resource intensive treatment

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

Preparation Administration

Integration

• Multiple sessions

Common elements

• Several non-drug establishing therapeutic rapport and alliance

• Setting therapeutic intentions or goals

• Drug sessions lasting 6-8 hours

• Medical monitoring and rescue drugs available

• One to three sessions depending on protocol

• One or more therapists present throughout

• Encouragement from the therapists to be open to the experience that unfolds

• Psychoeducation about acute drug effects and potential experiences

• Development of coping strategies or grounding techniques for challenging experiences

• Assessment of readiness and risk factors

2 doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | the bmj

sessions aer each administration

• Processing and making meaning of experiences

• Translating Classic psychedelics (eg, psilocybin)

insights into behavioral change

• Pronounced alterations in consciousness (cognition, affect, and perception)

• Supporting

• Patient reclines with eyeshades and music throughout

psychological

• Minimal dialogue; emphasis on non-directive inner exploration

stability

• Therapists maintain supportive presence primarily through silent witnessing

• Duration and

• Brief check-ins mainly to ensure safety and comfort; active support offered when needed

frequency varies

MDMA for PTSD

by protocol (typically two to six

• Primary effects on emotional processing and interpersonal trust

sessions)

• Less intense perceptual effects than classic psychedelics

• Therapists actively support emotional processing of a trauma while following participant's lead

• Dynamic balance between inner focus and therapeutic dialogue, shiing between periods of silent inner processing, verbal expression of emerging memories and emotions, and active engagement with therapists

Fig 1 | Psychedelic assisted therapy treatment models combine pharmacological intervention with structured psychological support in three distinct phases. MDMA=3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine; PTSD=post-traumatic stress disorder

model contributes to small sample sizes and limits long term follow-up feasibility. Implementation faces substantial barriers stemming from the treatment model, including therapist training requirements, high per patient clinician time costs, and specialized facility requirements. Additionally, safety monitoring is complicated by variable adverse event assessment that risks systematic under-reporting despite published trials reporting high tolerability.5

Although the term “psychedelic” encompasses mechanistically diverse compounds including ketamine and ibogaine, the current review focuses on classic serotonergic psychedelics (principally psilocybin) and MDMA as the compounds most advanced in clinical development. These substances are examined together based on their overlapping therapeutic approach of limited drug administration within psychotherapy or structured psychological support (fig 1), rather than strict pharmacological similarity. In this review, we describe each compound, survey candidate mechanisms of action, assess the clinical evidence base, discuss translational challenges, and suggest future directions for research.

Methods Sources and selection criteria We identified articles by searching bibliographic databases including PubMed (January 2000 to January 2025), limited to English language publications. Box 1 outlines the inclusion and

Screening Preparation

sessions

exclusion criteria applied. To ensure comprehensive coverage while maintaining focus on clinically relevant evidence, we prioritized randomized controlled trials, systematic reviews, and meta- analyses. We also included key mechanistic and translational studies that inform clinical applications. The online supplement provides a representative PubMed search strategy. Database searches were supplemented by forward citation tracking of key papers, reference list screening of recent systematic reviews, hand searching of specialized journals, and consultation with subject matter experts to identify additional relevant studies.

Mechanisms of action of classic psychedelics The therapeutic effects of classic psychedelics involve interacting pathways across molecular, circuit, and psychological levels. Research has identified specific mechanisms from serotonin 2A (5-HTenhancement 2A) receptor activation and neuroplasticity to brain network reorganization and cognitive flexibility changes. These mechanisms may operate synergistically or contribute independently to therapeutic benefit through pluralistic causation.6 This section reviews current evidence organized across three levels: molecular and cellular foundations, circuit and network reorganization, and cognitive and behavioral outcomes, acknowledging that therapeutic effects likely emerge from complex interactions between these levels.

Drug administration

Integration sessions

Safety check-ins

Fig 2 | Schematic of various sessions involved in participant dosing studies. These components form the core of the psychedelic clinical trial paradigm

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

pharmacological binding correlates studies with subjective show that effect 5-HTintensity,2A receptor 12

while pretreatment antagonist ketanserin with almost the entirely selective blocks 5-HTthese 2A effects.13-15 Not Endogenous all 5-HTserotonin 2A agonists are and compounds hallucinogenic. including lisuride activate the receptor without altering consciousness.16 This selectivity reflects biased agonism at compounds including 5-HT2A receptors: hallucinogenic classic psychedelics preferentially activate the Gq signaling pathway, while non-hallucinogenic agonists preferentially activate the β-arrestin pathway, pointing to the vital role of biased agonism in driving subjective effects.17 5-HTβ-arrestin, 2A receptor also drives agonism, downstream whether it activates changes in Ggene q or

transcription, glutamate transmission, and AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid) and NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor activation, processes that may underlie the evidenced pro-neuroplastic effects of serotonergic psychedelics.18-20

Neuroplastic effects Some preclinical work shows that psychedelics enhance neuroplasticity—the brain’s capacity to modify its physical structure and functional connections in response to stimuli21—though data in humans remain sparse owing to methodological constraints. Given that dysfunctions in neuroplasticity have been implicated in various mental disorders,22 23 these plasticity enhancing effects represent a candidate therapeutic mechanism. In animal models, psychedelics are understood to increase plasticity in various domains: structurally by creating new dendrites and spines; functionally by enhancing cell excitability and long term potentiation; and behaviorally by increasing cognitive and psychological flexibility— adaptive capacities are detailed further below— though whether these reflect the same underlying mechanisms remains to be established.

Molecular plasticity—At the molecular level, psychedelics have been shown to increase expression of plasticity associated genes, including those encoding for brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and components of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway24—pathways also implicated in therapeutic responses to conventional antidepressants.25 Initial work in single cell laboratory studies26 showed this sequential relation: 5-HTsignaling 2A receptor through activation internal leads cascades to increased and Box 1: Literature search selection criteria Inclusion criteria

• Peer reviewed articles

• Randomized controlled trials, meta-analyses, systematic reviews, and observational studies

• Studies focusing on psychiatric conditions (eg, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, substance use disorders)

• Articles, including preclinical research, reporting mechanisms of action, efficacy, or safety Exclusion criteria

• Case reports or case series

• Studies with sample sizes of less than eight participants

• Non-peer reviewed literature or conference abstracts

Psilocybin

Structural plasticity

BDNF TrkB (tropomyosin receptor kinase B) receptors, the primary high affinity receptors for BDNF (fig 3). Using selective antagonists, the authors showed that induced blocking increases 5-HTin 2A dendritogenesis, or TrkB prevented spinogenesis, psychedelic

and synaptogenesis. More recent evidence indicates psychedelics may directly modulate TrkB: both psilocin (the active metabolite of psilocybin) and

the bmj | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 3

Molecular and cellular foundations Pharmacology Classic psychedelics show diverse pharmacology, with binding profiles including various serotonergic, dopaminergic, and adrenergic targets.7 8 However, their characteristic subjective effects are driven primarily is densely by expressed agonism in at cortical the 5-HTregions 2A receptor, including which the frontal, prefrontal, and visual cortices.9-11 Human

α q/11

β γ

PLCβ β-arrestinERK 1/2

mTORC1 associated Plasticity genes

Fig cell 3 surface, | Psilocybin starting binds various at 5-HTinternal 2A and TrkB cascades (tropomyosin that ultimately receptor induce kinase the B) transcription

receptors on

of plasticity associated genes that lead to structural and functional changes in plasticity. ERK=extracellular signal regulated kinase; mTOR=mammalian target of rapamycin; PLC=phospholipase C

Functional plasticity

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

LSD bind to TrkB with high affinity, with plasticity promoting effects persisting signaling is blocked.27

4 doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | the bmj

even when 5-HT2A Direct evidence in humans remains methodo- logically challenging to obtain. While animal studies show increased central (brain) BDNF, peripheral BDNF levels in humans show no consistent changes after psychedelic administration,28 though the association between peripheral and central BDNF remains incompletely understood. Establishing molecular plasticity changes in patients represents an important next step for the field.

Structural plasticity—These molecular changes drive structural modifications that could underlie long term therapeutic change. In mice, a single dose of psilocybin led to increases in dendritic spine size and density in the medial frontal cortex that persisted for at least one month,29 mirroring the structural changes seen during successful learning and memory formation.30 Similarly, in pigs,31 psilocybin increased synaptic density marker SV2A in hippocampal and prefrontal cortex tissues, an effect which persisted for at least seven days.

Metaplasticity—Psychedelics may also induce metaplasticity—changes in the capacity for subsequent plasticity.32 Unlike the direct structural changes described above, metaplasticity involves priming neurons to respond more readily to future plasticity inducing stimuli. Preclinical work shows serotonergic psychedelics create lasting alterations in neuronal responsiveness, increasing cortical excitatory transmission33 and enhancing short term potentiation in hippocampal regions.34 Thus, limited dosing may produce therapeutic benefits that persist well beyond acute drug effects—by creating windows of enhanced neural adaptability during which therapeutic insights, behavioral changes, and integration may work more readily to reshape neural circuits.

Circuit and network reorganization Global network principles Psychedelics markedly affect brain networks that underlie cognitive flexibility and emotional processing, suggesting therapeutic mechanisms for psychiatric disorders characterized by rigidly negative thought content35 or disrupted emotional processing.36 A finding replicated in several studies is globally decreased connectivity within brain networks alongside increased connectivity between networks.37 38 Baseline functional connectivity patterns may predict the magnitude of psilocybin induced network changes39 and antidepressant effect,40 though larger studies are needed to validate potential biomarkers. Various networks and circuits crucial to causing psychiatric disease and its progression have been shown to change after psychedelic administration.

Default mode network: historical foundation Early psychedelic neuroimaging focused on the default mode network (DMN)—a network

of brain regions most active during rest and internally focused activities like self-reflection and daydreaming.41 Aberrant DMN function is implicated across psychiatric conditions.42 Functional magnetic resonance imaging shows psychedelics decrease within-DMN connectivity and increase its connectivity with other networks.43 However, DMN changes lack specificity: alcohol, amphetamines, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) also reduce within-network connectivity.44-46 Therefore, investigation of more specific mechanistic frameworks is warranted.4 8

Cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical circuits The cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) model (fig 4) has emerged as a key framework for understanding psychedelic effects. CSTC circuits regulate cortical input through thalamic gating of ascending sensory signals, with structural and functional abnormalities implicated across several psychiatric disorders.47-49 The thalamic gating function is essential for maintaining perceptual coherence, attentional focus, and the suppression of irrelevant receptors, stimuli. particularly LSD, on through cortical activation layer 5 pyramidal of 5-HT2A neurons, may relax these gating constraints, permitting greater sensory inflow to associative cortical areas,50 51 and plausibly contributing to the perceptual alterations characteristic of psychedelic states. Psilocybin and LSD affect prepulse inhibition, an operational measure of CSTC dependent sensorimotor gating.52 53 The interval dependent effect of psilocybin on prepulse inhibition—reducing prepulse inhibition at short delays but enhancing it at longer ones54—suggests selective modulation of thalamic gating rather than a global disintegration.

Emotional processing networks: clinical targets Psychedelics also affect emotional processing circuits, which is particularly relevant given that many psychiatric disorders involve dysregulated emotional processing and altered threat perception. LSD has been shown to reduce amygdala reactivity to negative stimuli, with effects persisting beyond the acute drug state.50 One week after taking psilocybin, healthy people showed reduced negative affect and decreased amygdala responses to facial affect stimuli.55 In treatment resistant depression, improved affect recognition persists one month after taking psilocybin.56 However, the temporal dynamics of these changes appear complex. Increased amygdala reactivity to fearful faces one day after psilocybin administration in people with depression correlated with positive clinical outcomes.57 These findings suggest psychedelics may start a dynamic reorganization of emotional processing circuits that evolves over time, potentially normalizing negative biases and reducing emotional avoidance.58 59

REBUS model: computational perspective The REBUS (relaxed beliefs under psychedelics) model provides a computational framework for

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

brain network changes,62 highlighting a broader methodological challenge: resting state findings may not capture how drugs modulate brain activity during clinically relevant cognitive and emotional processes. Furthermore, considerable variability in analytic Medial

Excitation

approaches across resting state studies complicates prefrontal

Ventral striatum

Sensory cortex L5

Thalamus

cortices

Reduced inhibition

cross-study comparisons. Future work using standardized task based paradigms and harmonized Disinhibited imaging methods will be crucial for understanding flow of sensory information

how circuit changes relate to therapeutic outcomes.

These circuit level reorganizations may provide the neurobiological substrate for the cognitive and psychological changes observed during therapeutic response, though the precise relations between network changes and clinical outcomes remain to be clarified. Fig 4 | Simplified representation of effects of classic psychedelics on cortico-striatal- thalamic 5 (L5) increases functioning. its excitatory 5-HT2A receptor output to activation the ventral in the striatum, medial which prefrontal ultimately cortex reduces

layer

Cognitive and behavioral outcomes Cognitive flexibility inhibitory control over the thalamus. As a result, the normal gating function of the thalamus is disrupted and thalamocortical connectivity increased, enhancing sensory flow to the cortex and inducing perceptual alterations

Human evidence for psychedelic enhanced plasticity stems from behavioral measures, particularly post-acute increases in cognitive flexibility—the ability to adaptively switch between tasks, mental frameworks, and strategies as the environment understanding psychedelic therapeutic effects.60

demands. A single dose of psilocybin (25 mg) According to this model, psychedelics reduce the

enhanced cognitive flexibility in patients with major precision weighting of high level priors, diminishing

depressive disorder (n=24).63 In this open label the influence of entrenched, top-down beliefs on

trial, psilocybin improved set shifting performance perception and cognition while allowing bottom-up

by reducing perseverative errors, the tendency sensory information greater influence. Supporting

to persist in following outdated response rules, this framework, preliminary neurophysiological

for at least seven days. Importantly, these effects evidence in healthy volunteers (n=20) showed muted

were independent of mood change, suggesting a neural markers of surprise to unexpected stimuli

distinct neuroplastic mechanism. Complementary after 75 μg of LSD, suggesting a loosening of previous

observational data from a prospective survey of 657 expectations.61

people using psilocybin mushrooms showed self- This mechanism may explain the apparent

reported cognitive flexibility increased significantly transdiagnostic efficacy of psychedelics. Many

at two to four weeks (standardized mean difference psychiatric disorders involve maladaptive internal

0.23) and two to three months (0.22) after use, models. Therapeutic loosening of these pathological

with greater “mystical experiences” predicting predictions may create windows for adaptive belief

larger improvements.64 Although promising, updating during the integration phase of treatment.

these findings require replication in larger clinical REBUS also explains the sensitivity of psychedelics:

samples. with high level predictions weakened, environmental inputs gain greater influence on experience and

Emotional processing and behavioral engagement belief formation. This suggests that the post-acute

Beyond the circuit level changes described above, integration phase, when people work with therapists

psychedelics produce measurable behavioral to process insights and consolidate new perspectives,

improvements in emotional processing. One study of may be particularly effective because of enhanced

rats given psilocybin showed increased engagement environmental receptivity.

in reward seeking tasks through an optimism bias,65 While theoretically compelling, bridging imple-

an effect that persisted for 14 days and parallels mentational findings (such as altered DMN con-

behavioral activation interventions in depression nectivity) to computational mechanisms (such as

treatment. In an open label trial examining psilocybin modified predictive processing) remains challenging,

for treatment resistant depression, participants and direct empirical validation of REBUS predictions

(n=17) showed baseline impairments in facial in clinical populations has yet to be shown.

emotion recognition speed compared with controls. One month after two psilocybin sessions (10 mg and Methodological considerations

25 mg), this deficit was largely remediated, with The association between brain network changes

faster emotion recognition correlating with greater and clinical outcomes remains difficult to interpret,

reductions in anhedonia,56 but not with overall in part because the effects of psychedelics on brain

depression scores. These findings suggest potential activity appear to be highly context dependent.

restoration of reward related behavioral responses Task engagement attenuates psychedelic induced

disrupted during depression.

the bmj | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 5

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

Subjective and psychological processes

ments in core deficits across psychiatric disorders, The relation between various subjective aspects of

while increased behavioral activation directly psychedelic experiences and therapeutic outcomes

addresses motivational deficits characteristic of remains contentious.66 67 Studies have reported

depression. More research is needed on aspects of associations between mystical-type experiences

the acute subjective effects and persisting effects of and transdiagnostic clinical improvement in cancer

psychedelics. related distress,68 69 treatment resistant depression,70 and substance dependencies.71 72 The mystical-type

MDMA mechanisms of action in PTSD experience, as measured by the mystical experience

MDMA has distinct pharmacology and therapeutic questionnaire, encompasses feelings of unity,

applications compared with those covered above positive mood, transcendence of time and space, and

relating to classic psychedelics. A synthetic drug ineffability. Similar constructs include the “oceanic

known for its stimulant and empathogenic effects, boundlessness” factor of the five dimensional

enhancing energy, emotional connection, and mood, altered states of consciousness scale (assessing

MDMA is being tested primarily for PTSD using a feelings of connection, positive mood, and spiritual

more actively engaged psychotherapy model than experience), and the ego dissolution inventory

the non-directive support typical of trials with classic (measuring self-world boundary dissolution).73

psychedelics (though some classic psychedelic However, causal relevance remains unclear.74

studies also include psychotherapy; fig 1). Crucially, both therapeutic benefit and subjective effects complicating are thought experimental to depend dissociation.

on 5-HT2A agonism,

Pharmacological mechanisms Like classic psychedelics, MDMA binds to several Subjective measures of acute effects encounter phenomenological validity challenges.73 Acute

serotonin receptors. Ketanserin pretreatment attenuates the characteristic emotional and cognitive deficits may impair recall accuracy, while differences in interpreting terms like “spiritual” or

perceptual receptor activation effects of contributes MDMA, suggesting to these that effects, 5-HTas 2A “unity” may introduce systematic measurement with classic psychedelics.80 However, MDMA acts error. Pronounced subjective effects may also

primarily by triggering the release of monoamines induce “halo effects”: participants who have had

through their respective transporters, predominantly an intensely positive or meaningful experience

serotonin, followed by norepinephrine and may rate all positive descriptors highly, rather

dopamine. Serotonin transporter inhibition is than discriminating between specific experiential

particularly linked to positive mood effects, while qualities.

norepinephrine transporter mediated effects Certain other psychological processes show

contribute to stimulant-like properties.81 consistent associations with outcomes. Emotional breakthrough—the confrontation of typically avoided emotional material75—was the strongest

Neurophysiological mechanisms These acute pharmacological actions trigger subjective predictor of antidepressant response at

changes in emotion processing neural circuits. three week follow-up in the largest psilocybin trial (n=233; r=−0.512).76 A systematic review found that

Initial neuroimaging in healthy adults shows reduced amygdala blood flow and increased psychological insight—new understanding about

amygdala-hippocampal connectivity after MDMA.82 oneself, relationships, or existential concerns—was

This increased coupling, observed at rest, may significantly higher in psychedelic than placebo

reflect enhanced integration of emotional and conditions in 93% of controlled studies making this

contextual memory processes, though the direction comparison, with stronger outcome associations

of information flow cannot be inferred from resting than mystical studies.77

experiences in 55% of comparative

state data. This circuit is crucial for emotional memory formation, contextualizing affective These processes may work sequentially:

information, and fear processing.83 84 Dysfunction in emotional breakthrough during acute effects

amygdala-hippocampal connectivity is implicated in facilitates psychological insight post-acutely, ena-

causing PTSD and anxiety disorders.85 Patients with bling revised self-understanding and improved

PTSD typically show reduced connectivity compared adaptive responding to future stressors. Increases

with controls.86 Normalization of amygdala- in psychological flexibility—the ability to adapt

hippocampal communication could theoretically behavioral strategies based on changing demands

enhance adaptive processing of emotional stimuli rather than immediate emotional reactions or rigid behavioral patterns78—mediate psychedelic induced

and emotional memory consolidation in PTSD. However, the therapeutic relevance remains unclear. improvements across depression, anxiety, and trauma symptoms.78 79

The single available neuroimaging study of patients with PTSD following MDMA assisted therapy These findings show how psychedelic induced

(n=9) found increases in amygdala-hippocampal neuroplasticity and circuit reorganization may

functional connectivity that approached but translate into clinically meaningful change.

did not reach statistical significance. Given the Enhanced cognitive flexibility and normalized

small sample, underpowered even by functional emotional processing represent measurable improve-

magnetic resonance imaging standards, this result

6 doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | the bmj

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

permits little confident inference.87 Like classic psychedelics, MDMA appears to decrease within- network functional connectivity of the default mode network,88 although it has a less pronounced effect on between-network functional connectivity.89

Recent work suggests that MDMA reopens a critical period for social reward learning through oxytocin receptor activation in the nucleus accumbens. This plasticity requires both serotonin transporter activation and a social context, suggesting a mechanistic basis for MDMA’s enhancement of therapeutic relationships.90 One study found that LSD and psilocybin also show context dependent social learning effects,91 suggesting another potentially shared mechanism that may contribute to therapeutic effects across MDMA and classic psychedelics. However, a coordinated five laboratory study was unable to replicate psilocybin induced reopening of this critical period, though protocol differences limit direct comparison with the original findings.92

Psychological and therapeutic mechanisms In line with early clinical observations,93 MDMA produces acute effects that likely facilitate psychotherapy: selective impairment of negative emotion recognition,94-96 increases in trust, cooperation, and sociability,97 98 and decreased concern about negative evaluation by others.99 Prosocial changes partly reflect release of oxytocin, a neuropeptide implicated in parent-infant bonding, social affinity, and trust,100 with these effects blunted in patients with oxytocin deficiency secondary to hypothalamic dysfunction.101 Oxytocin mediated prosociality may enhance therapeutic alliance, while acutely reduced fear may enable trauma processing without overwhelming arousal.102

The reprocessing of aversive stimuli is central to evidence based PTSD treatments.103 104 Preclinical models show that MDMA enhances fear extinction and disrupts fear memory reconsolidation.105 106 In mice, fear extinction enhancement requires both serotonin activation,107 transporter with MDMA in distinct psychotherapeutic approaches studied to date. Classic psychedelics typically use non- directive support during sustained periods of internally directed experience, often involving vivid imagery, autobiographical memory, and altered self- perception. By comparison, MDMA assisted therapy (principally the Lykos protocol for PTSD, though other exposure protocols are being developed to pair with MDMA from more evidence based psychotherapies) involves active therapeutic dialogue and verbal processing through the drug session.

Clinical evidence Although an integrative understanding of therapeutic mechanisms remains to be elaborated, evidence suggests that classic psychedelics and MDMA may be effective in treating diverse neuropsychiatric conditions. Evidence quality remains variable, but maturing evidence bases are emerging for specific indications.

This review now examines the clinical evidence, focusing on the most extensively studied applications: MDMA assisted therapy for PTSD, and psilocybin and other classic psychedelics in depressive disorders. We then survey evidence on substance use disorders and psychiatric symptoms secondary to life threatening illness. Our scope prioritizes the most rigorous trials, emphasizing larger samples when possible.

Post-traumatic stress disorder MDMA’s therapeutic potential in PTSD has been investigated through a systematic research program spanning several clinical trials. To date, approximately 289 participants have been enrolled in randomized, placebo controlled trials of MDMA assisted therapy for PTSD. While this sample size provided adequate statistical power given the large effect sizes observed in exploratory studies, it is smaller than the thousands of participants usually enrolled before drug licensing. Moreover, these trials have typically screened out around 90% of potential participants, using exclusion criteria more restrictive and treatment 5-HT2A increasing receptor

than typical PTSD research—particularly any personality disorders, or non-alcohol or cannabis BDNF expression in the amygdala,105 suggesting that

substance use disorder within 12 months—compared synaptic plasticity may mediate therapeutic effects.

with 13% of PTSD psychotherapy trials that exclude Although patients with PTSD show diminished fear

personality disorders, and 56% of trials that impose extinction,108 human studies show that MDMA (125

no substance use restriction.110 Given the high mg) enhances fear extinction and its retention as

rates of substance use comorbidity in patients with measured by skin conductance response, but not fear

PTSD,111 112 these restrictions raise questions about potentiated startle.109

generalizability to broader clinical populations. How these mechanisms interact remains unclear.

The first phase 3 trial (MAPP1) compared MDMA Both MDMA and classic psychedelics appear

assisted therapy (80-120 mg) with placebo with to enhance neuroplasticity and alter emotional

therapy in 90 participants with severe PTSD.113 At processing through serotonergic mechanisms, but

18 weeks, MDMA produced significantly greater through distinct pathways. Striking alterations

reductions in CAPS-5 (clinician administered PTSD in consciousness using classic psychedelics may

scale for DSM-5) scores than placebo (difference facilitate emotional breakthrough and subacute

11.9 points, 95% confidence interval (CI) 6.3 to cognitive flexibility, while MDMA’s prosocial and

17.4, Cohen’s d=0.91, P\<0.0001). Although 67% anxiolytic properties specifically enhance processing

of MDMA recipients no longer met PTSD criteria of traumatic memories by supporting therapeutic

versus 32% of those receiving placebo, high rates of alliance. This mechanistic divergence is reflected

functional unblinding (when psychedelics’ obvious

the bmj | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 7

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

effects undermine blinding integrity) complicate interpretation—32% of participants reported previous MDMA experience, and higher dropout in the placebo group suggests possible expectancy effects.

A second phase 3 trial (MAPP2) extended these findings in a more diverse population, randomizing 104 participants to MDMA (n=53) or placebo (n=51) with identical therapy.114 The sample included 33.7% non-white and 26.9% Hispanic or Latino participants. The results largely replicated MAPP1. At six to eight weeks after the trial’s third and final drug assisted session, MDMA showed greater reductions in CAPS-5 scores (difference −8.9 points, 95% CI −13.7 to −4.1, Cohen’s d=0.7, P\<0.001) and higher rates of PTSD remission (46.2% v 21.4%). Treatment effects were consistent regardless of symptom severity, trauma type, or presence of the dissociative subtype of PTSD. MDMA assisted therapy also showed superiority on functional impairment measured by the Sheehan disability scale (difference −1.20, 95% CI −2.26 to −0.14, Cohen’s d=0.4, P=0.03). However, functional unblinding remained problematic: 94% of MDMA recipients correctly guessed their treatment assignment. While differential dropout rates persisted, they were less pronounced (1.9% MDMA v 15.7% placebo).

A recent meta-analysis confirms the efficacy of MDMA assisted therapy versus placebo across trials (Hedges’ g=−1.53, 95% CI −2.56 to −0.49 for CAPS-5 reduction), with significantly higher rates of loss of diagnosis and remission.115 Interpretation of these findings is complicated by several methodological factors.

Functional unblinding represents a primary concern. Although blinding integrity is rarely assessed in clinical trials generally,116 117 the extent of unblinding in MDMA assisted therapy trials is notable. Importantly, recorded effect sizes in these trials exceed typical placebo response rates in PTSD trials,118 119 suggesting therapeutic effects beyond expectancy. However, recent quantitative analysis120 estimating unmasking bias in ketamine trials (standardized mean difference 1.1) noted that this exceeds MDMA assisted therapy effect sizes (standardized mean difference 0.7-0.9), suggestsing that functional unblinding may account for observed effects, though important differences between these interventions preclude direct comparison. Supporting this concern, significantly different dropout rates between active and placebo groups in MAPP1 may reflect nocebo effects in the placebo group rather than inflated expectations in the treatment group.

Additional factors complicate interpretation. High rates of previous MDMA experience (32% and 46% in the phase 3 trials) have raised concerns about expectancy effects, particularly given that recruitment has been reported to draw “heavily from the existing community of those interested and involved in the use of psychedelics for possible psychological benefits.”121 However, empirical analysis presented to the FDA advisory committee

8 doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | the bmj showed no significant association between previous MDMA use and treatment outcomes.122 123 More critically, blinded, placebo controlled data beyond two months of treatment are lacking, limiting our understanding of long term efficacy and safety. These methodological concerns, alongside other contested aspects of the evidence base likely contributed to the FDA’s decision not to license MDMA assisted therapy in August 2024.

Depressive disorders Depression is the most studied disorder in psychedelic research. Initial controlled evidence for psilocybin’s antidepressant effects came from a randomized waitlist controlled trial of 24 participants with moderate to severe major depressive disorder.124 Participants received two sessions of psilocybin therapy (20 mg/70 kg bodyweight, then 30 mg/70 kg bodyweight) and depression severity was assessed using the GRID Hamilton depression rating scale (GRID-HAMD) by clinicians who were masked to treatment arm. At five weeks, the treatment produced large reductions in depression severity compared with the waitlist (Cohen’s d=2.6, 95% CI 1.5 to 3.7, P\<0.001). At four weeks after both sessions, 71% had a clinically significant response to the intervention (≥50% reduction in GRID-HAMD score), and 54% were in remission (≤7 GRID-HAMD score). A 12 month follow-up study of this sample found treatment response and remission to be 75% and 58%, respectively,125 although a third of participants had started using antidepressants during that time.

In a larger randomized controlled trial (n=104) using a niacin active placebo, single dose psilocybin (25 mg) produced greater mean reductions in Montgomery-Åsberg depression rating scale (MADRS) scores after six weeks (between group difference −12.3, 95% CI −17.5 to −7.2).126 By this time point, more patients in the psilocybin group (42%) than the niacin group (11%) had a sustained antidepressant response (≥50% MADRS reduction).

The first head-to-head comparison against an established antidepressant127 randomized 59 participants with depression to receive psilocybin or escitalopram, each with psychological support. The escitalopram group received 1 mg psilocybin (active placebo) on days 1 and 21 plus daily escitalopram (10 mg increasing to 20 mg over six weeks), while the psilocybin group received 25 mg doses on days 1 and 21 plus daily placebo capsules (likewise doubling over six weeks). While no significant difference was found on the primary outcome measure (QIDS-SR-16—quick inventory of depressive symptomatology-self-report-16 items) at six weeks, psilocybin showed advantages on several secondary measures of depression and wellbeing—though these were not corrected for multiple comparisons. A six month follow-up found significant differences in favor of psilocybin on measures of work and social functioning (work and social adjustment scale: unstandardized coefficient estimate −7.46, 95% CI −12.4 to −2.47, P\<0.001), as well as meaning in

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

life (meaning in life questionnaire: 4.86, 0.67 to 9.05; P=0.021).128

One large trial of psilocybin (n=233) compared single doses of psilocybin (25 mg or 10 mg) with an active placebo-like control condition of very low dose psilocybin (1 mg) in treatment resistant depression.129 Each treatment group also received limited psychological support. This was a positive trial—high dose psilocybin (25 mg) reduced depression more than the 1 mg psilocybin control condition (−6.6 MADRS difference between groups, 95% CI −10.2 to −2.9), with an odds ratio of response at three weeks of 2.9 (95% CI 1.2 to 6.6) for 25 mg and 1.2 (0.5 to 3.0) for 10 mg. Although, as in the study by Carhart-Harris and colleagues,127 high dose psilocybin was associated with greater improvements in a range of secondary measures, the favorable odds ratio of antidepressant response for the 25 mg dose was not sustained at 12 weeks after administration.130

More recent work has begun bridging the gap to clinical implementation, albeit in smaller and open label studies. An open label study (n=29) included previously excluded populations (bipolar II depression (n=4); comorbid personality disorder (n=9)) and investigated repeated dosing.131 Initial psilocybin dosing (25 mg) produced significantly greater MADRS reductions than waitlist controls at two weeks (Hedge’s g=1.1, 95% CI 0.3 to 1.8, P=0.005). Upon relapse, 17 participants received a second dose, and five received a third, between 10 and 20 weeks after treatment. Successive doses were associated with cumulative symptom improvement. No treatment emergent mania or psychosis occurred in participants with complex presentations.

Although these findings indicate psilocybin’s antidepressant potential, key limitations include the exclusion of common comorbidities, outcomes assessed only to 12 weeks, and inadequate assessment or maintenance of blinding. The optimal dosing frequency and appropriate psychotherapeutic support remain to be determined.

Substance use disorders Classic psychedelics also show promise for substance use disorders.132 After publication of several research trials in substance use disorders in the first wave of psychedelic research,133 134 we review clinical evidence from modern era trials, all of which have embedded drug administration within comprehensive psychosocial treatment programs.

For alcohol use disorder, a multisite randomized controlled trial (n=95) compared two doses of psilocybin (25 mg/70 kg bodyweight and 25-40 mg/70 kg bodyweight) with 50 mg and 100 mg of the sedative antihistamine diphenhydramine.135 Drug treatment was supported by 12 psychotherapy sessions, including aspects of motivational enhancement therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, and bespoke support sessions before and after each drug session. While both groups reduced their drinking, psilocybin showed superiority at 33-36

the bmj | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 9 weeks for biomarker confirmed abstinence (odds ratio 2.84, 95% CI 1.17 to 6.89, P=0.02) and absence of heavy drinking days (2.5, 1.08 to 5.76, P=0.03). The psilocybin treatment group reported less than half of the heavy drinking days of the control group. However, there were high levels of functional unblinding (about 90%) in this study.

More recent trials have tested psilocybin in different contexts of alcohol use disorder with mixed results. A randomized controlled trial in patients with severe alcohol use disorder and comorbid depression (n=30) found that two doses of 25 mg psilocybin (v 1 mg control) significantly improved abstinence rates at 12 weeks (55% v 11%, P=0.03).136 However, a separate randomized controlled trial (n=37) investigating single dose psilocybin (25 mg) for relapse prevention after withdrawal found no significant differences in abstinence duration or alcohol use compared with a mannitol placebo.137

Tobacco use disorder may also be amenable to psychedelic based treatments. An open label pilot study (n=15) investigated two to three doses of psilocybin (20 mg/70 kg bodyweight; 30 mg/70 kg bodyweight) within a 15 week psychosocial intervention including cognitive behavioral therapy for smoking cessation.138 Abstinence rates were striking: 80% at six months and 60% at long term follow-up (mean 30 months), notable in a cohort averaging 19 cigarettes a day for 31 years, and six previous attempts to quit.138 139

Psychological distress associated with life threatening illness Psychological distress in life threatening illness was an early focus of modern clinical psychedelic research, building on findings from the 1950s-70s.140 141 After pilot studies using LSD142 and psilocybin143 demonstrated feasibility, two pivotal randomized crossover trials provided controlled evidence for efficacy.

Two trials evaluated psilocybin treatment in people who had received a life threatening diagnosis. In one study,69 51 patients with cancer and depression or anxiety symptoms, or both (including adjustment disorders) received high dose (22 or 30 mg/70 kg bodyweight) and low dose (1 or 3 mg/70 kg bodyweight) psilocybin. Five weeks after the first session, participants receiving high dose psilocybin showed significantly greater improvements in depression, anxiety, quality of life, and optimism. By six month follow-up, clinician rated measures showed persistent reductions in depression (GRID- HAMD-17) and anxiety (Hamilton anxiety rating scale) across all participants (Cohen’s d=2.98 and 3.40, respectively). However, limited blinding assessment and the highly selected, demographically homogeneous sample (94% white, 53% postgraduate educated) restrict the generalizability of findings. Concurrent work68 compared psilocybin (0.3 mg/kg bodyweight) with niacin (250 mg) in 31 patients with cancer related anxiety and depression (predominantly adjustment disorders). Seven

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

weeks after the first dose (ie, before crossover), the psilocybin first group showed significantly reduced anxiety and depression across several validated self- report measures (Cohen’s d=0.82-1.36). Although 55% reported previous psychedelic use, this did not significantly interact with outcome measures. Study staff correctly guessed group assignment for 97% of participants, whose blinding was not assessed. After six months, participants showed reduced depression, anxiety, demoralization, and hopelessness compared with baseline. Long term follow-up of surviving participants (n=15) found more than 60% reported enduring antidepressant or anxiolytic effects at 4.5 years, independently of cancer remission status.144 Only 8% received further psychotherapy or pharmacotherapy for cancer related distress after their trial participation.

Safety and monitoring While the trials discussed above provide promising evidence of efficacy, establishing the safety profile of psychedelic therapies is crucial for clinical translation. Below, we examine adverse events associated with psychedelic administration and safety practices in clinical trials.

Adverse events Clinical trials of psilocybin and MDMA show manageable safety profiles under controlled conditions, with most adverse effects being transient and self-limiting. Although reports of serious or non- serious adverse events requiring intervention are rare, they do occur. This underscores the importance of careful monitoring and reporting, a priority for the field given current methodological variability in adverse event assessment and reporting.5 145

The physiological effects of psilocybin, LSD, and MDMA are well characterized.7 While the clinical environment can limit risk factors associated with recreational psychedelic use,146 147 meta-analyses of available adverse event data in psilocybin148 and MDMA145 trials report high levels of adverse events that are largely tolerable, resolve within 48 hours, and do not lead to study withdrawal.

Some minor physiological adverse events are relatively well characterized and expected. For psilocybin versus comparators (including low dose psilocybin, niacin, and escitalopram; six trials, n=528), acute effects include increased blood pressure (relative risk 2.29), headache (1.99), nausea (8.85), dizziness (5.81), and anxiety (2.27, affecting 4-26% of participants), with lower rates of thought disorder (about 5%) and paranoia (about 2%).148 In placebo controlled MDMA assisted therapy trials for PTSD (three trials, n=214), prominent effects include hyperhidrosis (relative risk 6.37), chills (7.36), decreased appetite (4.12), mydriasis (13.41), nystagmus (6.10), and blurred vision (6.52).115

Psychedelic dosing sessions can involve powerful emotional experiences, including intense fear, overwhelming grief, or severe anxiety episodes that, while typically not meeting criteria for serious adverse

10 doi: 10.1136/bmj‑2024‑081723 | BMJ 2026;392:e081723 | the bmj events, can be highly distressing and require skilled therapeutic management. Psychological adverse events are relatively common. Most psychological reactions are mild and respond to psychological support, with pharmacological intervention required in approximately 0.5% of cases.149 Subacute effects include headache in 7-67% of psilocybin recipients,150 while MDMA recipients commonly report fatigue, low mood, and irritability for three to seven days after administration (about 40% in phase 3 trials113 114). However, enduring psychological and psychiatric effects, while rare, can be serious and warrant attention. Among 584 outpatient participants receiving high dose psilocybin, 23 experienced delayed serious adverse events including suicidal ideation and behavior.5 Although prospective participants judged to be at clinically significant risk of suicide were excluded from one large psilocybin trial (n=233), the trial recorded three participants in the 25 mg group reporting suicidal behavior, two in the 10 mg group reporting suicidal ideation or self-injury, and one in the 1 mg group engaged in self-injury.129 One completed suicide occurred in the control group (participant receiving 1 mg psilocybin) of a cancer related distress trial.69 Although these events occurred in clinically complex populations and may be attributable to other factors, careful investigation of potential mechanistic relations, and development of specific risk monitoring and management protocols, are warranted.

The association between psychedelic use and psychotic or manic symptoms represents a frequently cited safety concern. A meta-analysis of nine studies (totaling 7931 sessions with psilocybin or LSD)151 found low incidence rates of psychedelic induced psychosis: 0.4% in general populations and 0.2% in healthy people, though evidence quality was generally low with substantial heterogeneity among studies. Among those experiencing psychedelic induced psychosis, 13.1% later developed schizophrenia.

Bipolar I disorder emerges as a critical risk factor, with several studies showing increased manic or psychotic symptoms after psychedelic use.152 153 Some evidence paradoxically suggests protective effects for psychotic disorder histories, but replication is needed.153 154 Context and frequency of use appear relevant. Supervised clinical settings dramatically reduce risk compared with illegal use, which correlates with increased symptoms.151 152

These findings support current clinical exclusion criteria for bipolar I disorder and schizophrenia, while highlighting the importance of careful screening, professional supervision, and controlled administration contexts for therapeutic applications.

Drug-drug interactions Current protocols require pretreatment drug review. Coadministration of dopamine as haloperidol with classic psychedelics D2 antagonists such may be inadvisable. In a controlled trial, haloperidol did not attenuate psilocybin’s effects but exacerbated

STATE STATE OF OF THE THE ART ART REVIEW REVIEW

Box 2: Areas of psychedelic assisted therapy needing evidence based guidance

• Minimum qualifications and training requirements for therapists

• Essential components and duration of psychological support with adherence and fidelity ratings

• Facility specifications, standardized documentation, and monitoring protocols

• Management of common clinical scenarios (eg, acute psychological distress)

• Patient selection criteria balancing safety with accessibility

Inadequate adverse event reporting is not unique to psychedelic research, but widespread across psychotherapeutic, psychiatric, and medical trials.161-163 Although psychedelic trials exceed mean reporting standards in medical treatment contexts,5 the prospect of systematic underdetection of adverse events, with associated medical and ethical risks, should be addressed urgently.164 Future priorities include standardizing drug continuation protocols and implementing comprehensive adverse event assessment to ensure accurate risk evaluation and evidence based safety guidelines (box 2).

• Modifications needed for patients with common psychiatric comorbidities

• Standards for outpatient follow-up and adverse event monitoring

Ongoing considerations Problem of functional unblinding Functional unblinding has prompted a gear shift in trial design. The FDA’s 2023 draft guidance for psychedelic research explicitly acknowledges this anxiety and thought disturbance, suggesting potential for worsened psychological responses.15

challenge, recommending functional unblinding assessments and independent outcome assessors.165 By contrast, must be discontinued 5-HT2A antagonists because such they as risperidone block the

Recent phase 3 psilocybin trials for treatment resistant depression—and those under way—use primary mechanism of action. SSRI continuation

centralized raters masked to treatment assignment may be acceptable—a controlled trial (n=27) found

and assessment time points, attempting to reduce escitalopram pretreatment neither compromised

rater bias even when participants correctly guess psilocybin’s effects nor increased adverse effects.155

their treatment. Trial sponsors reported that the first An open label trial of 19 participants with treatment resistant depression who continued SSRI treatment

such trial met its primary endpoint (25 mg v placebo: −3.6 MADRS at week 5, P\<0.01, n=258)166 with showed antidepressant effects comparable to those

smaller effects than phase 2 trials. seen in trials requiring drug discontinuation.156

The complex association between expectancy and Caution is warranted with lithium because

outcomes further complicates interpretation. One retrospective and anecdotal reports from recreational

trial comparing psilocybin with escitalopram found use suggest an increased risk of seizures when combined with classic psychedelics.157

no correlation between psilocybin expectancy and outcomes,167 while an LSD crossover study showed For MDMA, the impact of SSRI discontinuation on MDMA assisted therapy presents distinct

better results when the active drug was given first, despite identical acute effects.168 Participants who considerations given shared action at the serotonin

received placebo before LSD showed diminished transporter, with pretreatment blunting MDMA’s

therapeutic response to LSD, highlighting complex subjective effects.158 Interactions with antipsychotics

interactions between drug timing, psychological also warrant consideration. haloperidol has been The found to Dshift 2 antagonist MDMA’s

context, and therapeutic outcomes that current models do not fully capture. These findings suggest characteristic euphoric profile to a dysphoric one,

that while perfect blinding may be unattainable, with reduced wellbeing and increased anxiety

systematic measurement of expectancy and unblin- reported.159

ding patterns could help distinguish pharmacolo- Importantly, systematic reviews of adverse event

gical from psychological contributions. reporting in trials of classic psychedelics5 (214 trials, n=3504) and MDMA assisted therapy145 (eight

Improving scalability trials, n=298) found highly variable and inadequate

Standard protocols requiring 15-25 hours of reporting across the literature. The latter study

therapeutic contact pose significant implementation found that no randomized controlled trial of MDMA

barriers. The field is exploring two primary responses, assisted therapy had adequate adherence (\>70%) to

each with distinct tradeoffs. the CONSORT Harms 2022 guidelines for reporting

Shorter acting compounds—These drugs promise harms in clinical trials.160 Moreover, 56% of non-

reduced clinical burden. Trial sponsors reported serious and 31% of serious adverse events recorded

that a recent multisite trial of intranasal 5-MeO-