Molecular Psychiatry

www.nature.com/mp

ARTICLE

OPEN

An fMRI-informed EEG model of the amygdala is associated
with salience network dynamics during naturalistic emotional
stimulation
Talia Brandman
Talma Hendler

1✉

, Yaki Stern1, Guy Gurevitch

2,3

, Tal Harmelech1, Gal Shoval1,3,4, Oded Kraft1, Aron Tendler

1

and

1,2,3,5,6

1234567890();,:

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025, modiﬁed publication 2025

The amygdala-derived EEG-fMRI pattern (Amyg-EFP) is an EEG model of fMRI amygdala activity with demonstrated therapeutic
implications in neurofeedback interventions aimed at emotion regulation. Yet, its distributed neural correlates and potential
relevance for emotional processing, independent of active modulation by neurofeedback, remain unexplored. This study aimed to
characterize the distributed brain activations captured by the Amyg-EFP during passive processing of naturalistic emotional stimuli.
Using simultaneous EEG-fMRI during stimulation with emotional movie and music excerpts in 71 healthy participants, we examined
the spatiotemporal coupling between the Amyg-EFP and fMRI activations across the brain. We further measured the correlation of
the Amyg-EFP with individual emotional reactivity ratings of the movie stimuli. Results revealed a correspondence between AmygEFP signal modulation and salience-network dynamics, tracking the anterior insula, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, and saliencecoactivated amygdala subregions. This association was speciﬁc to the Amyg-EFP, as a control EFP derived from the ventral striatum
showed a different coupling pattern. In addition, the Amyg-EFP, but not the control EFP, was associated with emotional reactivity
ratings of movie stimuli. Together, these ﬁndings tie localized amygdala activity captured by the Amyg-EFP, with broader saliencenetwork dynamics and with individual reactivity, during the processing of emotional stimuli. Thereby, this study highlights the
relevance of the Amyg-EFP for emotional reactivity, and its potential as a target in brain-based interventions for psychiatric
disorders characterized by emotional dysregulation.
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520–2529; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-025-03418-x

INTRODUCTION
Psychiatric disorders have traditionally been diagnosed based on
clinical observations of symptoms and signs, an approach limited
in its ability to capture underlying neurobiological mechanisms [1].
The Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) initiative proposes a shift
towards characterizing psychopathology along dimensional constructs grounded in neural circuits and processes [2–4]. This
approach aims to uncover transdiagnostic neural markers that
could inform interventions that target mental processes, driving
the pursuit of neuroanatomically precise and functionally valid
biomarkers [5–9]. Emotion regulation, a crucial process for
maintaining mental health, represents one such dimensional
construct [10]. Emotion regulation refers to the ability to modulate
the intensity, duration, and expression of emotional responses in a
context-appropriate manner. Disturbances in emotion regulation
are transdiagnostic, underlying various psychiatric disorders,
including depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) [11, 12]. Previous evidence implies a distributed network of
brain regions that may be involved in processes of emotion
regulation, including the amygdala, insula, ventromedial and
ventrolateral prefrontal cortices [13, 14]. Furthermore, following

treatment, improved emotion regulation skills are not only
reﬂected in behavioral and clinical measures, but can also be
detected through neural measures, such as amygdala activity and
amygdala-prefrontal connectivity [13–15]. For example, improved
emotion regulation was associated with larger differences in
amygdala response to negative versus neutral images [13], and
with larger inverse amygdala-prefrontal connectivity during
cognitive appraisal [14].
One way to therapeutically target brain processes related to
emotion regulation, including the amygdala, is Neurofeedback
(NF), a self-neuromodulation procedure in which individuals learn
how to regulate their own brain activity in a certain direction
[16, 17]. NF training is based on continuous measurement of brain
activity from an assigned target, leading to contingent quantitative feedback about its modulation relative to a baseline, given to
the trainee through an interactive feedback interface [18]. The
efﬁcacy of NF for treating a speciﬁc mental dysfunction depends
on its accordance with a relevant neural target associated with an
underlying mental process [9]. Given the established association
of the amygdala with emotional reactivity and regulation
[12, 19, 20], it could be considered a highly relevant structure

1
GrayMatters Health, Haifa, Israel. 2Sagol Brain Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. 3Gray Faculty of Medical & Health Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel. 4Child and Adolescent Division, Geha Mental Health Center, Petah Tikva, Israel. 5School of Psychological Sciences, Faculty of Social Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel. 6Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. ✉email: talia@graymatters-health.com

Received: 13 January 2025 Revised: 9 November 2025 Accepted: 2 December 2025
Published online: 15 December 2025

T. Brandman et al.

2521
for NF targeting of these processes. Studies using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) have demonstrated the
feasibility and utility of amygdala-targeted NF, by showing that
individuals can learn to self-regulate their amygdala activity to
alleviate clinical symptoms of PTSD, anxiety or depression [17, 18].
However, for NF to be widely used, it must satisfy not only the
requirement for neuroanatomical precision and process-relevance
of the neural target, but also provide measurement scalability,
which poses a challenge for fMRI-based NF. A scalable alternative
is EEG, but it is inferior to fMRI in its neuroanatomical precision
due to its lower spatial resolution and more so for activation of
deeply located nuclei such as the amygdala.
Recent advances in multimodal neuroimaging and computational methodologies have enabled the development of precise
neural-signal models that capture core neurocognitive processes
underlying psychopathology, intended to guide translational
psychiatry [21]. Along these lines, the EEG-fMRI Pattern (EFP; also
known as the Electrical FingerPrint) approach uses computational
modeling to combine the precision and scalability of two separate
modalities, in order to offer an effective solution for NF therapy
[22–24]. Speciﬁcally, the EFP is an EEG model trained on
simultaneously acquired EEG and fMRI data to predict the fMRI
activation of a speciﬁc brain region or network, which can then be
applied to new individuals without the need for MRI scanning. By
analytically linking scalp-recorded EEG signals to simultaneously
acquired localized fMRI activity, the EFP method utilizes the
scalability of EEG, while achieving higher neuroanatomical
precision and functional validity relative to traditional EEG
sampling methods used in NF [24, 25]. Utilizing this approach to
target the amygdala, an EEG model was trained to predict
amygdala fMRI activation, resulting in the amygdala-derived EEGfMRI pattern (Amyg-EFP) [23, 25], shown to correlate with
amygdala blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) activity in new
datasets [22, 26].
In several clinical trials, repeated sessions of Amyg-EFP NF have
been found to alleviate symptoms in disorders characterized by
emotional dysregulation, particularly PTSD [27, 28], as well as
Fibromyalgia [29], Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder [30], and adult
ADHD [31]. In addition, previous work from our group demonstrated that NF training down-regulation of the Amyg-EFP
improved neural and behavioral measures affected by emotion
regulation, more so than traditional whole-brain EEG NF methods
[24, 32]. Speciﬁcally, in post-training fMRI, repeated sessions of
Amyg-EFP NF had improved capacity for self-neuromodulation of
the amygdala [24] and reduced amygdala reactivity to negative
emotional stimuli [28]. Behaviorally, the training improved
emotion regulation indices in an emotional stroop task [24], and
in self-reports of alexithymia [22]. These ﬁndings support the
usefulness of the Amyg-EFP as a target for NF interventions aimed
at emotion regulation. Yet, our understanding of the Amyg-EFP
signal itself is limited by the scarcity of studies examining its
distributed neural correlates independent of active NF.
To date, it has been realized that successful down modulation
of the Amygdala during fMRI-NF corresponds to a distributed
network of activation beyond the target [32]. However, it is
unclear whether such additional network recruitment is part of the
NF learning process (e.g. a general regulation-task network), or
related to the actual recruitment of the target. We therefore asked
whether, during naturalistic emotional stimulation, the Amyg-EFP
signal corresponds with emotional reactivity and with brain
activation related to emotional reactivity within or beyond the
amygdala. To address these questions, in the current study we
examined the distributed fMRI representation of simultaneously
acquired Amyg-EFP signal during audiovisual emotional stimulation, as well as the correspondence between the Amyg-EFP and
participants’ emotional ratings of the same stimuli. By characterizing the distributed neural correlates of the Amyg-EFP, this study

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520 – 2529

aimed to enhance our understanding of the neurobiological basis
of this fMRI-guided EEG model of amygdala activity and its
relevance for neurocognitive processes of emotional reactivity.
We used simultaneous EEG-fMRI and data driven analytics to
examine the spatiotemporal coupling between the Amyg-EFP
signal and whole-brain fMRI BOLD activations during emotional
stimulation with video clips, movie scenes and music excerpts.
These naturalistic stimuli were aimed to induce emotional
processing in a manner that ﬂuctuates as in real-life events, thus
also naturally engaging processes of emotional reactivity and
regulation. Though we did not directly measure emotion
regulation modulation, we assessed emotional reactivity to the
movie stimuli, as a subprocess of emotion regulation [20]. A
behavioral emotional rating task, performed immediately following scanning, provided a psychological proxy of individual
emotional reactivity while viewing the stimuli. To further examine
the neuroanatomical speciﬁcity of the Amyg-EFP signal, we
compared the whole brain fMRI correlates of the Amyg-EFP to
those of a control EFP model derived from ventral striatum activity
(termed here VS-EFP). This was tested in two independent groups
of participants to assess replicability of data-driven neuroimaging
ﬁndings.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement
Study protocol and all related procedures were approved by Tel-Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center Institutional Review Board prior study initiation
(7_0030-23, 02/03/2023; 7_0239-23, 01/08/2023). Per 21 CFR 812.28(b)(7),
the study was performed in compliance with the requirements of the
Ethical Committees (EC). Per 21 CFR 812.3(t), the EC that reviewed the
study was responsible for ensuring the protection of the rights, safety, and
well-being of subjects involved. The study was performed in accordance
with the declaration of Helsinki and was conducted in agreement with
International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) guidelines on Good
Clinical Practice (GCP). All subjects provided written informed consent prior
to being screened. The informed consent documents met the requirements of 21 CFR 50.20 and contained the information required by 21 CFR
50.25(a), and 21 CFR 50.25(b). The EC conﬁrmed and approved the
informed consent document.

Participants

Thirty-six participants (19 male, age 18–60, M = 31.8, SD = 11.0) were
included in the test group of the main study. The replication group
included 35 participants (15 male, age 19–59, M = 30.2, SD = 8.9), as part
of a separate ongoing study (no subject overlap), from which we obtained
the earliest available data. The sample size of each group was chosen to
exceed our previous work validating the Amyg-EFP within pre-deﬁned
brain regions [24], in order to allow enough power to correct for multiple
comparisons in voxel-wise whole brain analyses. All participants were
healthy individuals with no pre-existing medical conditions and with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and hearing, who had passed the
standard screening requirements for MRI scanning. Main additional
exclusion criteria included past neurological or psychological clinical
diagnosis, as well as major brain injury, or current enrollment in a
therapeutic clinical study.

Stimuli
Three types of naturalistic stimuli were used to probe a range of emotional
responses.
Emotional video clips. We selected short video clips from the
alancowen.com database of emotionally-tagged videos [33]. The database
includes 2185 short videos, ranging between 1–15 s long, which had been
rated on 27 different kinds of emotion. Three categories of emotional clips
were extracted from the database, including videos rated high on fear
(Fear condition), high on joy (Joy condition), or low on all core emotions
(Neutral condition).
Emotional movie scenes. Two movie excerpts were selected: (1) The
farewell scene from the movie Stepmom (Columbus, 1998), portraying a
terminally-ill mother discussing her future departure with her children. This

T. Brandman et al.

2522

Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of the current study design and analysis. Concurrent EEG-fMRI was acquired during naturalistic audiovisual
stimulation, including emotion-tagged (fear, joy or neutral) video clips, emotional movie scenes and a classical musical piece. The fMRI signals
were preprocessed to yield the voxel-wise BOLD time-course. The EEG signals were processed and weighted with existing EFP model
coefﬁcients [25] to yield the EFP time-course. To examine the relationship between BOLD and EFP we performed a GLM analysis using linear
regression over the entire task time-course, as well as a sliding-window correlation analysis.
scene was chosen for its strong evocative induction as previously
demonstrated in limbic reactivity [34]. (2) A narrated scene of snakes
chasing after an iguana, extracted from the nature documentary Planet
Earth II (BBC, 2016), characterized by high intensity and suspense.
Musical piece. A 7-min piano track from the soundtrack the movie The
Hours, by Phillip Glass, previously tested for limbic reactivity [35].

Procedure
Concurrent EEG-fMRI data were acquired while participants underwent
naturalistic emotional stimulation tasks, as illustrated schematically in
Fig. 1. Participants arrived at Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center and after
ﬁlling out the consent form and related questionnaires were ﬁtted with the
EEG cap, followed by a short presentation with instructions for fMRI
participation and tasks. Inside the MRI scanner, participants underwent
anatomical and functional scans. Three passive stimulation tasks were used
for the current study: (1) viewing emotional video clips, (2) viewing
emotional scenes from movies, (3) listening to classical music. Additional
scan data including a reward task unrelated to the current research
objectives were not analyzed here.
Emotional video clips. The video clips were presented in separate
condition blocks. The Neutral clips were split into two blocks of 55 sec
each, whereas Joy and Fear each consisted of one block of 110 sec. Each
block presented the clips consecutively with 1-sec intervals (ﬁxation
screen) between clips. Each run began with a 5 sec ﬁxation screen,
followed by the four stimulation blocks with 15 sec ﬁxation screen
between each pair of blocks (total 380 sec). The task was run twice, with
different block orders. Each clip was presented one time per run.
Movie scenes. The two audiovisual scenes were presented in a single
run, beginning with 5-sec ﬁxation screen, followed by the Stepmom scene
for 501 sec, 20 sec ﬁxation interval, Snakes scene for 321 sec, ending with
20 sec ﬁxation screen (total 867 sec).
Musical piece. The Glass piece was presented in a single run, beginning
with 5-sec ﬁxation screen, followed by 423 sec of music and ending with
20 sec ﬁxation screen (total 448 sec).

fMRI acquisition
Structural and functional MRI scans were performed in a 3 T Siemens
MAGNETOM Prisma scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) with a 20channel head coil. Anatomical scans consisted of 3D T1-weighted MPRAGE
sequences with a 0.9 mm iso-voxel to provide high-resolution structural
images (repetition time (TR) / echo time (TE) = 1980/2.62 ms, ﬂip angle
(FA) = 8°, ﬁeld of view (FOV) = 224 × 224 mm).
Functional scans were acquired using a T2*-weighted multiband
accelerated EPI pulse sequence provided by Center for Magnetic
Resonance Research (CMRR), with a single band reference image for
better registration to the anatomical scan [36] (TR/TE = 1500/34.2 ms,
FA = 74°, voxel size = 2.2 mm3, FOV = 220 × 220 mm, 57 slices per
volume, multiband (MB) factor = 3). A total of 299 volumes were acquired
for the music listening run, 578 volumes for the movie run and 254
volumes for each of the emotional clips runs.
Additionally, reverse phase encoding spin echo image pairs were
acquired to correct susceptibility distortions in the functional images [37]
(TR/TE = 8000/66 ms, FA = 90°, voxel size = 2.2 mm3, FOV = 220 ×
220 mm).

fMRI preprocessing
Data were preprocessed using fMRIPrep FMRIPrep22.0.0, [38], including
slice-time correction, spatial realignment, motion correction (using the
‘mcﬂirt’ module of FSL), co-registration and artifact correction. Data were
transformed into MNI space, spatially smoothed with a 6 mm Kernel, and
corrected for motion artifacts automatically using independent component
analysis (ICA-AROMA). Anatomical data were segmented, and the resulting
gray-matter probabilistic map was used to determine the mask for wholebrain analyses. See Supplementary Methods for a full description of
functional data preprocessing procedure given in the fMRIPrep output.

EEG acquisition
EEG data were acquired using two battery-operated MR-compatible EEG
ampliﬁer (Brainamp MR Plus, Brain Products GmBH, Gliching, Germany)
and the BrainCap electrode cap with sintered Ag/AgCl ring electrodes,
providing 63 EEG channels and 1 electrocardiogram (ECG) channel
positioned according to the 10–10 coordinate system. Each channel’s
raw signal was ampliﬁed and sampled at 5 kHz and was online referenced
to a fronto-central position (AFz). Data were recorded using the Brain
Vision Recorder software (Brain Products GmbH, Gliching, Germany).

EEG preprocessing
EEG scanner related artifacts were removed in several steps. First, an
adaptive average artifact subtraction method (AAS [39],) implemented in
Brain Products Analyzer Software (Version 2.2, Brain Products GmbH) was
used and data were downsampled to 250 Hz. Next, data were bandpass
ﬁltered with a 4th order zero phase shift butterworth ﬁlter between
0.75–70 Hz. Cardiac R-peaks in the ECG signal were detected semiautomatically. Each r-peak was visually veriﬁed and, when necessary,
manually adjusted to correct both false-positive and false-negative
detections. Next, adaptive template subtraction [40] was used to remove
BCG artifacts time-locked to the r-peak of the QRS complex. A 4 Hz wide
notch ﬁlter centered at 33 Hz was further applied to account for a periodic
scanner-related noise in that frequency. Finally, independent component
analysis (ICA) was used to identify and discard eye-movement related
components, according to a visual inspection of both the spatial
topography and time-frequency content of each IC.

EFP calculation
The Amyg-EFP and VS-EFP signals were calculated ofﬂine using a statistical
model previously developed to enable the prediction of localized activity
in the amygdala and ventral Striatum BOLD. The two models’ basic
features are the Time-Frequency decomposition of the EEG in certain time
windows (As in Meir-Hasson et al. [23, 25]). This was originally
accomplished by applying machine learning algorithms on EEG data
acquired simultaneously with fMRI and validated on an external dataset (As
in [24].
For the Amyg-EFP, a 12-seconds long raw EEG segment of Pz electrode
referenced to FCz electrode was notch-ﬁltered for 50 Hz line interference,
and then converted to a time-frequency representation using the
Stockwell-transform. The time-frequency representation was binned to ¼
second, and the frequency domain was reduced to 10 frequencies. Each
resulting time-frequency bin was then multiplied by a predeﬁned weight

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520 – 2529

T. Brandman et al.

2523
and summed to a ﬁnal estimate of the Amygdala BOLD signal [23, 25]. The
VS-EFP was calculated by adapting the procedure used for Amyg-EFP
calculation and the VS-EFP presented in a previous study [41].

Generalized linear model analysis (GLM)

Whole-brain ﬁrst and second-level GLM were performed using the Nilearn
toolbox [42]. Signals were detrended, high-passed at 0.001 Hz and
demeaned across time for each voxel, and masked using the individual
probabilistic gray-matter map (in MNI space). Linear regression was
performed for each subject along the full time-courses of each task,
between the BOLD signal and the EFP regressor, separately for each EFP.
The resulting whole-brain effect-size maps (one per task) were statistically
tested at group level (single-sample t-test, 2-tails), and corrected for
multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) among all voxels,
and among amygdala voxels as deﬁned by AAL3 atlas [43] (Fig. 2A). In
addition, to compare between the regression effects of the two types of
EFP (Amyg-EFP and VS-EFP), the effect size maps of each participant were
contrasted, and the difference statistically tested at group level (pairedsamples t-test, 2-tails), with FDR correction across all voxels.

Individual region-of-interest (ROI) fMRI selection
Within the amygdala we selected two groups of voxels based on the
strength of their association with a salience network seed, during the Fear
block of the ﬁrst run of the Emotional Clips. For each participant, we
measured the correlation between each voxel of the amygdala (as deﬁned
by the AAL3 atlas; [43]) and the mean response (across voxels) of a seed
region (4-mm radius) in the right anterior insula (MNI coordinates: 36, 18, 4)
intended to probe salience-network related activity [44]. This resulted in a
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient for each voxel of the amygdala, for each
participant. Based on these scores, a salience-related amygdala cluster was
deﬁned as voxels whose correlation coefﬁcients were above the 85th
percentile, and at least above 0.2. A non-salience amygdala cluster was
deﬁned as voxels whose correlation coefﬁcients were below the 15th
percentile, and at least below 0.2.

Nonparametric testing of correlation coefﬁcients

To examine the correspondence between Amyg-EFP signal ﬂuctuations
and BOLD ﬂuctuations in the amygdala at the individual subject level, we
tested their correlation dynamics within each of the functionally-deﬁned
amygdala subregions described above. To test whether a participant’s
amygdala subregion was correlated with the Amyg-EFP beyond chance,
we compared the distribution (across voxels) of real correlations with a
simulated null distribution, calculated as follows.
Pearson correlations were computed between the Amyg-EFP timecourse and the BOLD signal of each voxel in the ROI, along a sliding timewindow of 10, 20, 30, 40, or 50 repetitions (TR), in 1-TR steps (e.g. window
1: 1–10, window 2: 2–11, …). For each voxel, the resulting correlation
coefﬁcients were averaged across windows. This yielded the realcorrelation distribution (separately for each window size) of size n, where
n is the number of voxels in the ROI.
To obtain the null distribution, windows of the EFP time-course were
shufﬂed, but not the repetitions within windows (e.g., window 1: 53–62,
window 2: 4–13, …). Correlations were then computed using the same
steps as for the real distribution. This permutation procedure was repeated
100 times to obtain a null distribution of the size 100 x n, where n is the
number of voxels in the ROI.
Chance level was determined for each individual ROI by the 95th
percentile of its null distribution. Thus, a single subject’s ROI-to-EFP
correlation was considered above-chance if the median of the real
distribution was higher than the 95th percentile of the null.
For presentation purposes, we multiplied the real distribution frequencies by 100 to match the number of null frequencies, such that they can be
displayed side by side.

Behavioral rating of emotional movie scenes

To measure natural ﬂuctuations in emotional response, we asked
participants to rate the two movie scenes presented in the movie task,
while viewing them a second time outside the scanner. Of the total 71
fMRI-EEG participants, 61 completed the rating task. Participants were
asked to refer to the emotional experience of their ﬁrst viewing (inside the
scanner), and rate it continuously throughout the timeline of the movie
task on a subjective emotional reaction scale (“How does it make you feel”)

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520 – 2529

from 1-very negative to 7-very positive (4- no emotional reaction).
Emotional ratings were centered to 0, converted to absolute emotional
reactivity (i.e., absolute distance from neutral) and averaged across the
timeline of each of the movie scenes. For each participant we then
calculated the difference in emotional reactivity score between the two
movies (Snakes scene minus Farewell scene, see Stimuli). Pearson
correlations were calculated across subjects between the magnitudes of
difference in movie ratings and the magnitudes of difference in EFP
response (mean amplitude across time) to the two movies.

RESULTS
Amygdala and whole-brain fMRI activity associated with
Amyg-EFP modulation
To unveil the activation network associated with the Amyg-EFP
modulation during emotional stimulation, we performed a linear
regression of the BOLD signal to the simultaneously acquired
Amyg-EFP time-course. This analysis aimed to test our primary
hypothesis that the Amyg-EFP would correspond to a brain
network involved in emotion processing.
First, we examined the right amygdala, which was used for the
original Amyg-EFP modeling [25] and deﬁned here by the AAL3
atlas [43]. As expected, voxels within the right amygdala exhibited
above-chance coupling (p < 0.05, FDR-corrected) with the AmygEFP signal. This was consistently observed across all three
naturalistic tasks (video clips, movie scenes and music) in both
the test group (n = 36) and an independent replication sample
(n = 35) (Fig. 2A).
Second, a whole-brain fMRI analysis revealed a network of
regions signiﬁcantly associated (p < 0.05, FDR-corrected) with
Amyg-EFP signal ﬂuctuations, across all three tasks (Fig. 2B). This
revealed a distributed associated network further examined in the
following analyses.
Differential network activations associated with Amyg-EFP
and VS-EFP modulation
To assess the neuroanatomical speciﬁcity of distributed fMRI
activity (i.e. network) associated with Amyg-EFP modulation
during emotional stimulation, we compared the regression effect
for Amyg-EFP with the regression effect for the control EFP
informed by fMRI activity in the ventral striatum (VS-EFP). We
focused on the movie scene task for this analysis due to its rich,
naturalistic content and longer duration, which provides the
optimal sensitivity range to track activity ﬂuctuations of various
brain networks at once. This allowed for a direct comparison
between the Amyg-EFP and the VS-EFP, which both responded
dynamically to the movie stimuli.
Two distinct networks emerged when overlaying statistically
signiﬁcant voxels corresponding to each of the EFPs (p < 0.05, FDR
corrected), from both participant groups (Fig. 3A). When directly
contrasting the regression effects, voxels displaying signiﬁcantly
higher effect sizes for the Amyg-EFP relative to the VS-EFP were
concentrated in salience network regions, especially the insula
and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), as well as in sensory
cortices (Fig. 3B; Amyg-EFP > VS-EFP, p < 0.025, FDR corrected).
Extraction of the mean effect sizes illustrates the stronger coupling
between the Amyg-EFP and core salience network nodes
compared to the VS-EFP (Amyg-EFP: mean β = 0.19, VS-EFP: mean
β = 0.01)(Fig. 3C). Notably, a different activation map emerged
when contrasting the VS-EFP over the Amyg-EFP (Supplementary
Figure S1; VS-EFP > Amyg-EFP, p < 0.025, FDR corrected).
Amyg-EFP correlations with amygdala subregions deﬁned
individually by salience coactivation
To further characterize the differential sensitivity of the Amyg-EFP
to salience-related activity within the amygdala, we deﬁned two
functional amygdala subregions individually for each participant
(see 4 different examples in Fig. 4A). Functional ROI selection

T. Brandman et al.

2524

Fig. 2 BOLD activation coupled with Amyg-EFP signal ﬂuctuations. Results of linear regression of voxel-wise BOLD to Amyg-EFP time-course
in each of the tasks, displaying above-chance voxels (P < 0.05, FDR corrected) (A) within the right amygdala (dashed outline) and (B) across the
brain, displayed on inﬂated template brain image. Replication data denoted ‘rep’.

within the amygdala was based on coactivation with a salience
network seed during fear-tagged video clips (task condition
selected to maximize salience signal to noise ratio). A “saliencerelated” amygdala cluster was deﬁned by high seed coactivation
(correlation above 85th percentile and R > 0.2) and a “nonsalience” cluster was deﬁned by low seed coactivation (correlation
below 15th percentile and R < 0.2).
To examine each participant’s correspondence between AmygEFP and salience-related amygdala dynamics, we performed a
nonparametric test of the correlation distribution within each of
the predeﬁned clusters. We used the movie scene data for this
analysis due to its longer duration than the fear clips (used for ROI
selection) and content variability, providing a dynamic response
range required for reliable estimates of the correlations. The real
distribution of sliding-window correlations between Amyg-EFP
and BOLD time-courses was compared to a shufﬂed-windows null
distribution. Results using a sliding window of 30-TR (45 sec)
revealed a higher rate of above-chance correlations with the
Amyg-EFP in the salience-related amygdala cluster than in the
non-salience cluster (Fig. 4B). Speciﬁcally, in the salience-related
cluster, 86% of participants (69% in the replication sample)
exhibited above-chance correlations (median of real > 95th
percentile of null) with the Amyg-EFP. By contrast, in the nonsalience amygdala cluster, 51% of participants (43% in the
replication sample) exhibited above-chance correlations with the
Amyg-EFP. This pattern was consistently observed across different
sliding-window sizes, ranging between 10 and 50 TR (Fig. 4C).
These results demonstrate increased speciﬁcity of Amyg-EFP for
salience-related subregions within the amygdala.
Amyg-EFP correlation with individual emotional reactivity
indices
To test the difference in individual reactivity to each of the two
movie scenes (Snakes and Farewell) we examined the behavioral
response to each movie scene in emotional intensity ratings
collected outside the scanner. Henceforth, we will use the term
emotional reactivity to refer to this measure. We used a reactivity
index (see Methods) to capture variability in absolute range of
emotional response rather than the valence of negative or positive

value, based on previously demonstrated amygdala sensitivity to
emotional reactivity (rather than valence) [45].
Results revealed a signiﬁcant difference in emotional reactivity
index between the two scenes across subjects (T = 2.28,
P = 0.026), with higher reactivity to the Snakes scene than
Farewell scene. This nicely mirrored the difference in Amyg-EFP
activation amplitude between the two corresponding movie
scenes (T = 3.44, P = 0.001), also showing higher response during
the Snakes scene. Emotional reactivity was correlated with AmygEFP activation amplitude across subjects (R = 0.26, P = 0.04),
showing that the difference in Amyg-EFP signal response when
viewing the two movie scenes, was associated with the difference
in subjective emotional reactivity to these same scenes (Supplementary Figure S2). By contrast, the VS-EFP did not show a
difference in activation amplitude between the two movie scenes
(T = 0.33, P = 0.744) nor was it correlated with the emotional
reactivity difference (R = −0.11, P = 0.379).
DISCUSSION
The present study provides novel insights into the distributed
neural correlates of the Amyg-EFP, during naturalistic emotional
processing. We found that the Amyg-EFP signal modulation
corresponds to a distributed network of fMRI activations beyond
the amygdala (Fig. 2). The consistency of this pattern across three
types of naturalistic emotional stimuli suggests a robust relationship between Amyg-EFP and this fMRI activation pattern.
Particularly, the Amyg-EFP corresponded to sensory network
activations and key nodes of the salience network (Fig. 3), known
to be involved in emotional reactivity and modulation; two
necessary subprocesses in emotion regulation [20]. Importantly,
we show that salience network coupling was speciﬁc to the AmygEFP, whereas a control EFP derived from the ventral striatum was
associated with a different activation topography. In addition, our
results replicate previous studies validating the association of the
Amyg-EFP with activations within the amygdala itself [22, 24, 25],
and extend them by showing that subregions of the amygdala
that are more functionally connected with salience network
activity, are also more highly correlated with Amyg-EFP
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520 – 2529

T. Brandman et al.

2525

Fig. 3 Whole-brain activations coupled with Amyg-EFP compared to VS-EFP signals. Results of linear regression of voxel-wise BOLD to EFP
time-course for the Amyg-EFP and VS-EFP during passive viewing of movie scenes. (A) Above-chance voxels (P < 0.05, FDR corrected)
associated with the Amyg-EFP (orange) and VS-EFP (blue), overlayed on an inﬂated brain template image. (B) Voxels showing signiﬁcantly
higher (P < 0.05, FDR corrected) GLM effect sizes for regression to the Amyg-EFP than to the VS-EFP were observed mainly in salience-network
regions (black outline) and sensory (visual, auditory, somato-motor) regions (dotted outline), as deﬁned by Schaefer et al., (2018) [65]. (C) Mean
effect size in major nodes of the salience network [65], for regression to the Amyg-EFP (orange) and to the VS-EFP (blue), presented as
mean ± SEM across subjects. Replication data presented in the second column, denoted ‘rep’.

modulation during emotional stimulation (Fig. 4). Although in the
current study we did not measure emotion regulation processes
directly, the association of the Amyg-EFP with individual
emotional ratings indicates its relevance for emotional reactivity,
a necessary subprocess in emotion regulation [20]. Together,
these ﬁndings suggest that Amyg-EFP modulation during
naturalistic emotional stimulation corresponds to saliencenetwork dynamics within the amygdala and beyond. Thereby,
these ﬁndings extend our view of the neural correlates of AmygEFP, from its established amygdala correspondence to a broader
network-level functionality.
The salience network, primarily comprised of the bilateral
anterior insula and dACC (and adjacent pre-supplementary motor
area), plays a crucial role in detecting salient stimuli and
coordinating appropriate responses to these stimuli [44, 46]. The
anterior insula in particular is thought to integrate interoceptive
information associated with emotional salience to generate
subjective feeling states [47]. The dACC is involved in conﬂict
processing that may trigger top-down regulatory processes [48]. In
the context of emotion regulation, the salience network as a
whole facilitates the detection of emotionally salient information
(i.e. reactivity) and may initiate regulatory processes by engaging
other networks such as the central executive network (i.e.
modulation) [49]. Though the current study did not directly
measure emotion regulation abilities, the correspondence
between Amyg-EFP amplitude and emotional reactivity ratings
of the movie stimuli, indicates the relevance of Amyg-EFP signal
modulation in the current data to emotional reactivity processing.
Given the importance of the salience network in emotion
regulation, the coupling of Amyg-EFP with salience-network
related processing further highlights the relevance of Amyg-EFP
for emotion reactivity.
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520 – 2529

Within the theoretical framework of emotion-regulation systems, the Amyg-EFP’s association with the salience network
suggests that it may capture emotional reactivity and its
corresponding neural circuits as a subprocess of emotion
regulation [20, 50]. Speciﬁcally, the emotion regulation model
proposed by Etkin et al. [20] stipulates that the amygdala, insula
and dACC are all critically involved in emotional reactivity and
participate in implicit processes such as salience detection and
attention allocation. Supporting this idea, recent evidence shows
that when viewing negative emotional images, the amygdala
exerts an excitatory inﬂuence on salience network regions, while
the periaqueductal gray provides inhibitory modulation on both
the salience network and the amygdala [51]. This demonstrates
the amygdala’s role in facilitating emotional reactivity to affective
cues within the context of a complex regulation circuit. Here, the
Amyg-EFP’s association with emotional ratings, the salience
network and the amygdala, indicates its relevance to this implicit
regulation mechanism. Notably, a similar circuit involving the
amygdala and salience network regions was previously hypothesized to explain successful self-neuromodulation during neurofeedback [17], thus future studies using an active regulation task
should examine the Amyg-EFP also in the context of explicit
regulation mechanisms [19].
In addition to the main ﬁndings, our study revealed a
segregation within the amygdala region, with distinct subregions
showing differential coactivation with the salience network. This
observation aligns with Gothard’s work [52] on multidimensional
processing in the amygdala, which emphasizes the diverse
functional roles of amygdala subregions. It suggested that
neurons in the amygdala integrate social, sensory, and emotional
information into overlapping multidimensional representations,
from which salience arises as contextually-relevant features

T. Brandman et al.

2526

Fig. 4 Nonparametric testing of the correlation distribution within functional amygdala clusters. Voxel-wise correlations between rightamygdala BOLD and Amyg-EFP signals (during passive movie viewing) were calculated along a sliding window of the run time-course and
averaged across windows. To generate the null distribution the same procedure was repeated 100 times with shufﬂed data. (A) Results
obtained from four example participants. Left panel presents coronal anatomical views of the right amygdala (dotted outline), highlighting
functional salience-related (orange) and non-salience (blue) clusters, deﬁned individually by high or low coactivation with a salience network
seed in a separate task. The middle and right panels present the null correlation distribution (gray) and real correlation distribution (x100 for
visualization) in the salience-related amygdala cluster (orange) and non-salience amygdala cluster (blue), per participant. Colored dashed lines
denote the median of the real distribution, and gray dashed lines denote the 95th percentile of the null distribution (chance level). Abovechance participants were determined by a real-distribution median higher than the 95th percentile of the null distribution. (B) Percentage of
above-chance participants (as deﬁned above) in each functional amygdala subregion, in the test group (left) and replication (right), for
correlations tested along a 30-TR sliding window. (C) Percentage of above-chance participants (as deﬁned above) in each of the functional
amygdala subregions for sliding-window sizes ranging between 10 and 50 TR.

highlighted across inputs. The functional amygdala cluster
we found to be connected to the salience network activity may
be involved in processing various types of salient affective
information, such as threat indicators, facial and vocal expressions,
learned contextual cues, etc. This aligns with the amygdala’s
known role in integrating multi-modal affective information and
its involvement in salience processing [52], which is consistent
with the use of naturalistic multi-modal stimulation in this
study. This segregation highlights the complex and nuanced role
of the amygdala in emotional processing and its interaction with
large-scale brain networks that are known to be involved in
emotional processing.
The clinical relevance of our ﬁndings is underscored by
mounting research implicating dysfunction of the amygdala and
salience network as a shared neural substrate underlying emotion
dysregulation across a range of psychiatric disorders (i.e. transdiagnostically) [53–58]. Importantly, alterations in amygdala and
salience network activity have been linked to anxiety and stressrelated disorders such as PTSD [56, 58]. In schizophrenia [52, 53],
salience network regions exhibited hypo-activation during rest but
hyper-activation in response to irrelevant stimuli [59, 60]. Interestingly, aberrant salience processing has also been proposed as a
key mechanism in chronic somatic conditions characterized by
emotion dysregulation, such as chronic pain in ﬁbromyalgia [61].
Recent evidence suggests that similar mechanisms may be at play
in other somatic conditions known as psychosomatic, like irritable
bowel syndrome, where altered functional connectivity within the

salience network has been observed [62]. While the speciﬁc
clinical manifestations differ, these ﬁndings suggest potential
common neural substrates, particularly the amygdala and salience
network, which could be targeted therapeutically across mental
and psychosomatic disorders by Amyg-EFP NF, as already
demonstrated for some of these disorders [22, 27, 29]. Notably,
given that some psychiatric conditions are characterized by
blunted rather than heightened reactivity (e.g., anhedonia in
depression; [63]), they may theoretically beneﬁt from upregulation
rather than downregulation training previously tested in disorders
with hyperreactivity (e.g., PTSD; [64]).
By tracking amygdala dynamics embedded in the salienceemotion circuitry, the Amyg-EFP may act as a proxy for
amygdala activity associated with emotional reactivity in psychopathology [9, 22, 32]. This has important implications for NF
interventions, particularly in the context of process-guided NF,
inspired by RDoC [1] as proposed by Lubianiker et al. [9]. By
this idea, in order to address the underlying mechanism of
a psychiatric disorder, NF should target a speciﬁc mental
process by training to self-modulate its associated neural
system. This approach is suggested to lead to more precise
and personalized interventions [3]. Accordingly, Amyg-EFP NF
can be conceptualized as a process-guided NF approach
targeting emotional reactivity and its associated neural
network, as has been proposed for amygdala-guided NF in
general [17]. Indeed, recent work by Zopfs et al. [26] has
explored potential relationships between the Amyg-EFP and
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520 – 2529

T. Brandman et al.

2527
various neural systems within the RDoC framework, under active
fMRI-NF in a patient cohort that had partially been trained in
Amyg-EFP NF. They found associations between Amyg-EFP and
fMRI activation in the amygdala, dACC and sensory networks, as
also seen here in healthy individuals when reacting to emotional
stimuli. The current study extends our understanding of Amyg-EFP
neural correlates by characterizing its associated network of
brain activation, independent of activations induced by
self-neuromodulation processes during NF [19, 53]. Ultimately,
the Amyg-EFP could be relevant to both emotional modulation
and emotional reactivity, based on its association with NF training
during active modulation in previous work [22, 32], and with
salience-network activity during naturalistic emotional stimulation
found here.
We acknowledge that alternative approaches exist for developing neural measures of emotional processing. For example,
decoded neurofeedback approaches use machine learning
to extract task-speciﬁc patterns from brain activity, potentially
offering more direct cognitive speciﬁcity [17]. Alternatively,
behavioral marker calibration approaches validate neural measures against well-characterized behavioral tasks that isolate
speciﬁc cognitive processes [19]. While these approaches offer
advantages in terms of process speciﬁcity, our fMRI-informed
approach provides unique insights into neuroanatomically
deﬁned correlates of an EEG signature that has already demonstrated therapeutic utility in multiple clinical populations. The
current network-level understanding helps bridge the gap
between scalable EEG measurement and the complex neural
circuits underlying emotional processing. This was achieved
by using naturalistic emotional stimulation along with the
measurement of individual emotional reactivity, indicating
the relevance of Amyg-EFP for this subprocess of emotion
regulation. This is important for guiding future studies that will
examine the neural changes associated with clinical effects of
Amyg-EFP NF.
Finally, while providing valuable insights, a few limitations of
the current study point towards potential future directions. First,
we examined Amyg-EFP coupling during passive processing of
naturalistic emotional stimuli, and the correlational nature of our
ﬁndings precludes direct inferences about causal relationships
between the Amyg-EFP modulation and engagement of emotion
regulation processes. Future approaches employing active emotion regulation tasks, NF or prospective assessments before and
after self-neuromodulation could help elucidate the directionality
of the observed relationships, to provide more direct insights
distinguishing between implicit and explicit regulation processes
affecting the Amyg-EFP signal. Second, without preregistration,
our focus on a speciﬁc task (particularly the movie scenes) for EFP
comparisons may be viewed as an analytical limitation, though
partially alleviated by the replication of these effects in the second
group. Finally, the current work was performed on healthy
participants, limiting generalizability. To enhance the clinical
validity of our ﬁndings future studies should employ similar
analyses on mixed data obtained from clinical and healthy
populations.
In conclusion, this study presents the ﬁrst comprehensive
investigation of the distributed neural correlates of the Amyg-EFP
model during naturalistic emotional stimulation. Particularly, our
ﬁndings reveal that Amyg-EFP neural correlates extend beyond
the amygdala, to the salience network at large, while at the same
time highlighting the speciﬁcity of Amyg-EFP to salience-related
activity within the amygdala itself. The correlation of the AmygEFP with individual emotional reactivity provides a cognitive
context for understanding the functional relevance of these
ﬁndings for emotional processing. Together, these ﬁndings tie
amygdala activity captured by the Amyg-EFP during emotional
processing, with broader network dynamics that might also be
relevant for aspects of emotion regulation, particularly emotional
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520 – 2529

reactivity. The demonstrated neural correlates of the Amyg-EFP,
together with its clinical utility in NF, open new avenues for
developing and reﬁning scalable yet precise brain-based interventions for disorders of emotional dysregulation. Moreover, it
highlights the potential of the EFP approach for translating
neuroimaging insights into brain-based interventions, representing an important step towards realizing the promise of precision
psychiatry.
CODE AVAILABILITY
The fMRI analysis code will be made available from the corresponding author upon
reasonable request.

DATA AVAILABILITY
The human neuroimaging datasets generated and/or analyzed in this study are not
publicly available as they are the intellectual property of GrayMatters Health. Data
may be made available from GrayMatters Health upon reasonable request, subject to
review under the company’s data-governance, privacy, and intellectual-property
policies. Data requests should be addressed to Adar Shani at adar@graymattershealth.com.

REFERENCES
1. Insel T, Cuthbert B, Garvey M, Heinssen R, Pine DS, Quinn K, et al. Research
Domain Criteria (RDoC): toward a new classiﬁcation framework for research on
mental disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167:748–51.
2. Cuthbert BN, Insel TR. Toward the future of psychiatric diagnosis: the seven pillars
of RDoC. BMC Med. 2013;11:126.
3. Sanislow CA, Ferrante M, Pacheco J, Rudorfer MV, Morris SE. Advancing translational research using NIMH research domain criteria and computational methods.
Neuron. 2019;101:779–82.
4. Williams LM. Precision psychiatry: a neural circuit taxonomy for depression and
anxiety. Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3:472–80.
5. Davis KD, Aghaeepour N, Ahn AH, Angst MS, Borsook D, Brenton A, et al. Discovery and validation of biomarkers to aid the development of safe and effective
pain therapeutics: challenges and opportunities. Nat Rev Neurol.
2020;16:381–400.
6. Kraguljac NV, McDonald WM, Widge AS, Rodriguez CI, Tohen M, Nemeroff CB.
Neuroimaging
biomarkers
in
schizophrenia.
Am
J
Psychiatry.
2021;178:appi.ajp.2020.2.
7. Quinlan EB, Banaschewski T, Barker GJ, Bokde ALW, Bromberg U, Büchel C, et al.
Identifying biological markers for improved precision medicine in psychiatry. Mol
Psychiatry. 2019;25:243–53.
8. Woo C-W, Chang LJ, Lindquist MA, Wager TD. Building better biomarkers: brain
models in translational neuroimaging. Nat Neurosci. 2017;20:365–77.
9. Lubianiker N, Goldway N, Fruchtman-Steinbok T, Paret C, Keynan JN, Singer N,
et al. Process-based framework for precise neuromodulation. Nat Hum Behav.
2019;3:436–45.
10. Gross JJ. Emotion regulation: Current status and future prospects. Psychol Inq.
2015;26:1–26.
11. Fernandez KC, Jazaieri H, Gross JJ. Emotion regulation: a transdiagnostic perspective on a new RDoC domain. Cognit Ther Res. 2016;40:426–40.
12. Kring AM, Sloan DM. Emotion Regulation and Psychopathology: A Transdiagnostic Approach to Etiology and Treatment. Guilford Press; 2009.
13. Cisler JM, Sigel BA, Kramer TL, Smitherman S, Vanderzee K, Pemberton J, et al.
Amygdala response predicts trajectory of symptom reduction during TraumaFocused Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy among adolescent girls with PTSD. J
Psychiatr Res. 2015;71:33–40.
14. Goldin PR, Ziv M, Jazaieri H, Hahn K, Heimberg R, Gross JJ. Impact of cognitive
behavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder on the neural dynamics of cognitive reappraisal of negative self-beliefs. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013;70:1048.
15. Zilverstand A, Parvaz MA, Goldstein RZ. Neuroimaging cognitive reappraisal in
clinical populations to deﬁne neural targets for enhancing emotion regulation. A
systematic review. Neuroimage. 2017;151:105–16.
16. Thibault RT, MacPherson A, Lifshitz M, Roth RR, Raz A. Neurofeedback with fMRI:
A critical systematic review. Neuroimage. 2018;172:786–807.
17. Paret C, Hendler T. Live from the ‘regulating brain’: Harnessing the brain to
change emotion. Emotion. 2020;20:126–31.
18. Goldway N, Strauss I, Keynan JN, Hellrung L, Horstmann A, Paret C, et al. Feasibility and utility of amygdala neurofeedback. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.
2022;138:104694–104694.

T. Brandman et al.

2528
19. Gross J. Handbook of emotion regulation. 2nd ed. New York: The Guilford Press;
2014.
20. Etkin A, Büchel C, Gross JJ. The neural bases of emotion regulation. Nat Rev
Neurosci. 2015;16:693–700.
21. Ferrante M, Gordon JA. Computational phenotyping and longitudinal dynamics
to inform clinical decision-making in psychiatry. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2020;46:243–4.
22. Keynan JN, Cohen A, Jackont G, Green N, Goldway N, Davidov A, et al. Electrical
ﬁngerprint of the amygdala guides neurofeedback training for stress resilience.
Nat Hum Behav. 2018;3:63–73.
23. Meir-Hasson Y, Keynan JN, Kinreich S, Jackont G, Cohen A, Podlipsky-Klovatch I,
et al. One-class FMRI-Inspired EEG model for self-regulation training. PLoS ONE.
2016;11:e0154968–e0154968.
24. Keynan JN, Meir-Hasson Y, Gilam G, Cohen A, Jackont G, Kinreich S, et al. Limbic
activity modulation guided by functional magnetic resonance imaging–inspired
electroencephalography improves implicit emotion regulation. Biol Psychiatry.
2016;80:490–6.
25. Meir-Hasson Y, Kinreich S, Podlipsky I, Hendler T, Intrator N. An EEG Finger-Print
of fMRI deep regional activation. Neuroimage. 2014;102:128–41.
26. Zopfs M, Jindrová M, Gurevitch G, Keynan JN, Hendler T, Baumeister S, et al.
Amygdala-related electrical ﬁngerprint is modulated with neurofeedback training
and correlates with deep-brain activation: proof-of-concept in borderline personality disorder. Psychol Med. 2023;54:1651–60.
27. Fruchter E, Goldenthal N, Adler LA, Gross R, Harel EV, Deutsch L, et al. Amygdaladerived-EEG-fMRI-Pattern Neurofeedback for the treatment of chronic posttraumatic stress disorder. A prospective, multicenter, multinational study evaluating clinical efﬁcacy. Psychiatry Res. 2024;333:115711–115711.
28. Fruchtman-Steinbok T, Keynan JN, Cohen A, Jaljuli I, Mermelstein S, Drori G, et al.
Amygdala electrical-ﬁnger-print (AmygEFP) NeuroFeedback guided by
individually-tailored Trauma script for post-traumatic stress disorder: Proof-ofconcept. NeuroImage: Clinical. 2021;32:102859.
29. Goldway N, Ablin JN, Lubin O, Zamir Y, Keynan JN, Or-Borichev A, et al. Volitional
limbic neuromodulation exerts a beneﬁcial clinical effect on Fibromyalgia. Neuroimage. 2019;186:758–70.
30. Tene O, Bleich Cohen M, Helpman L, Fine NB, Halevy A, Goldway N, et al. Limbic
self‐neuromodulation as a novel treatment option for emotional dysregulation in
premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD); a proof‐of‐concept study. Psychiatry
Clin Neurosci. 2023;77:550–8.
31. Adler LA, Anbarasan D, Leon T, Sardoff T, Descorbeth O, Cho D, et al. Pilot study
of prism EFP NeuroFeedback in adult ADHD. J Atten Disord. 2023;28:905–12.
32. Gurevitch G, Lubianiker N, Markovits T, Or-Borichev A, Sharon H, Fine NB, et al.
Amygdala self-neuromodulation capacity as a window for process-related network recruitment. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2024;379:20240186.
33. Cowen AS, Keltner D. Self-report captures 27 distinct categories of emotion
bridged by continuous gradients. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2017;114:E7900–E7909.
34. Raz G, Winetraub Y, Jacob Y, Kinreich S, Maron-Katz A, Shaham G, et al. Portraying
emotions at their unfolding: a multilayered approach for probing dynamics of
neural networks. Neuroimage. 2012;60:1448–61.
35. Singer N, Jacoby N, Lin T, Raz G, Shpigelman L, Gilam G, et al. Common modulation of limbic network activation underlies musical emotions as they unfold.
Neuroimage. 2016;141:517–29.
36. Xu J, Moeller S, Auerbach EJ, Strupp J, Smith SM, Feinberg DA, et al. Evaluation of
slice accelerations using multiband echo planar imaging at 3T. Neuroimage.
2013;83:991–1001.
37. Andersson JLR, Skare S, Ashburner J. How to correct susceptibility distortions in
spin-echo echo-planar images: application to diffusion tensor imaging. Neuroimage. 2003;20:870–88.
38. Esteban O, Markiewicz CJ, Blair RW, Moodie CA, Isik AI, Erramuzpe A, et al.
fMRIPrep: a robust preprocessing pipeline for functional MRI. Nat Methods.
2019;16:111–6.
39. Allen PJ, Josephs O, Turner R. a method for removing imaging artifact from
continuous EEG recorded during functional MRI. Neuroimage. 2000;12:230–9.
40. Allen PA, Polizzi G, Krakow K, Fish DR, Lemieux L. Identiﬁcation of EEG events in
the MR scanner: the problem of pulse artifact and a method for its subtraction.
Neuroimage. 1998;8:229–39.
41. Singer N, Poker G, Dunsky N, Nemni S, Reznik Balter S, Doron M, et al. Development and validation of an fMRI-informed EEG model of reward-related ventral
striatum activation. Neuroimage. 2023;276:120183–120183.
42. Abraham A, Pedregosa F, Eickenberg M, Gervais P, Mueller A, Kossaiﬁ J, et al.
Machine learning for neuroimaging with scikit-learn. Front Neuroinform.
2014;8:14.
43. Rolls ET, Huang C-C, Lin C-P, Feng J, Joliot M. Automated anatomical labelling
atlas 3. Neuroimage. 2020;206:116189.
44. Menon VP. Large-Scale Functional Brain Organization. Brain Mapping: An Encyclopedic Reference. 2. Elsevier BV; 2015. p. 449–59.

45. Kahn I, Yeshurun Y, Rotshtein P, Fried I, Ben-Bashat D, Hendler T. The role of the
amygdala in signaling prospective outcome of choice. Neuron. 2002;33:983–94.
46. Seeley WW. The salience network: a neural system for perceiving and responding
to homeostatic demands. J Neurosci. 2019;39:9878–82.
47. Craig AD. How do you feel — now? The anterior insula and human awareness.
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009;10:59–70.
48. Botvinick MM, Cohen JD, Carter CS. Conﬂict monitoring and anterior cingulate
cortex: an update. Trends Cogn Sci. 2004;8:539–46.
49. Ochsner KN, Silvers JA, Buhle JT. Functional imaging studies of emotion regulation: a synthetic review and evolving model of the cognitive control of emotion.
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012;1251:E1–E24.
50. Braunstein LM, Gross JJ, Ochsner KN. Explicit and implicit emotion regulation: a
multi-level framework. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2017;12:1545–57.
51. Ince S, Steward T, Harrison BJ, Jamieson AJ, Davey CG, Agathos JA, et al. Subcortical contributions to salience network functioning during negative emotional
processing. Neuroimage. 2023;270:119964–119964.
52. Gothard KM. Multidimensional processing in the amygdala. Nat Rev Neurosci.
2020;21:565–75.
53. Downar J, Blumberger DM, Daskalakis ZJ. The neural crossroads of psychiatric
illness: an emerging target for brain stimulation. Trends Cogn Sci.
2016;20:107–20.
54. Goodkind M, Eickhoff SB, Oathes DJ, Jiang Y, Chang A, Jones-Hagata LB, et al.
Identiﬁcation of a common neurobiological substrate for mental illness. JAMA
Psychiatry. 2015;72:305.
55. Schimmelpfennig J, Topczewski J, Zajkowski W, Jankowiak-Siuda K. The role of
the salience network in cognitive and affective deﬁcits. Front Hum Neurosci.
2023;17:1133367.
56. Etkin A, Wager TD. Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: a meta-analysis of
emotional processing in PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and speciﬁc phobia. Am J
Psychiatry. 2007;164:1476–88.
57. Hamilton JP, Etkin A, Furman DJ, Lemus MG, Johnson RF, Gotlib IH. Functional
neuroimaging of major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis and new integration
of baseline activation and neural response data. Am J Psychiatry.
2012;169:693–703.
58. Sripada R, King A, Garﬁnkel S, Wang X, Sripada C, Welsh R, et al. Altered restingstate amygdala functional connectivity in men with posttraumatic stress disorder.
J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2012;37:241–9.
59. Palaniyappan L, Simmonite M, White Thomas P, Liddle Elizabeth B, Liddle Peter F.
Neural primacy of the salience processing system in schizophrenia. Neuron.
2013;79:814–28.
60. Menon V, Palaniyappan L, Supekar K. Integrative brain network and salience
models of psychopathology and cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia. Biol
Psychiatry. 2022;94:108–20.
61. Pinto AM, Geenen R, Wager TD, Lumley MA, Häuser W, Kosek E, et al. Emotion
regulation and the salience network: a hypothetical integrative model of ﬁbromyalgia. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2023;19:44–60.
62. Qi R, Liu C, Ke J, Xu Q, Zhong J, Wang F, et al. Intrinsic brain abnormalities in
irritable bowel syndrome and effect of anxiety and depression. Brain Imaging
Behav. 2015;10:1127–34.
63. Pizzagalli DA. Depression, stress, and anhedonia: toward a synthesis and integrated model. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2014;10:393–423.
64. Nicholson AA, Rabellino D, Densmore M, Frewen PA, Paret C, Kluetsch R, et al. The
neurobiology of emotion regulation in posttraumatic stress disorder: Amygdala
downregulation via real‐time fMRI neurofeedback. Hum Brain Mapp.
2016;38:541–60.
65. Schaefer A, Kong R, Gordon EM, Laumann TO, Zuo X-N, Holmes AJ, et al. Localglobal parcellation of the human cerebral cortex from intrinsic functional connectivity MRI. Cereb Cortex. 2017;28:3095–114.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study received funding from scientiﬁc research and innovation schemes granted
to GrayMatters Health by the European Innovation Council (EIC grant number
190165249) and by the Israel Innovation Authority (IIA grant number 79319). We also
thank the reviewers of this manuscript for their useful suggestions and insight.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conception and design by Brandman, Hendler and Kraft. Acquisition setup by
Brandman and Gurevitch. Data processing and analysis by Brandman and Stern.
Interpretation and manuscript outline by Brandman, Hendler, Kraft, Tendler, Stern
and Shoval. Manuscript drafting and revision by Brandman, Hendler, Harmelech,
Stern and Gurevitch.

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520 – 2529

T. Brandman et al.

2529
COMPETING INTERESTS
Talia Brandman, Yaki Stern, Gal Shoval, Aron Tendler and Talma Hendler are
employees of GrayMatters Health, which implements EEG models tested in this study.
Guy Gurevitch and Tal Harmelech are consultants for GrayMatters Health, which
implements EEG models tested in this study. Oded Kraft is a co-founder and the CEO
of GrayMatters Health, which implements EEG models tested in this study.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-025-03418-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Talia Brandman.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:2520 – 2529

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025, modiﬁed
publication 2025

