Molecular Psychiatry

ARTICLE

www.nature.com/mp

OPEN

Spatiotemporal mapping of brain organisation following the
administration of 2C-B and psilocybin
Pablo Mallaroni

1✉

, S. Parker Singleton2,3, Natasha L. Mason

1

, Theodore D. Satterthwaite

2,3

and Johannes G. Ramaekers

1

1234567890();,:

© The Author(s) 2026

As psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy gains momentum, clinical investigation of next-generation psychedelics may lead to novel
compounds tailored for speciﬁc populations. 2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromophenethylamine (2C-B) is a psychedelic phenethylamine
reported to produce less dysphoria and subjective impairment than the psychedelic tryptamine psilocybin. Despite its popularity
among recreational users and distinct pharmacodynamics, the neural correlates of 2C-B remain unexplored. Using 7 T resting-state
functional MRI in 22 healthy volunteers, we mapped out the acute effects of matched doses of 20 mg 2C-B, 15 mg psilocybin and
placebo across spatiotemporal benchmarks of functional brain organisation. In a within-subjects, double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover design, we evaluated the neuropharmacological and neurobehavioural correlates of an array of connectivity measures –
including static (sFC) and global connectivity (gFC), dynamic connectivity variability (dFC), and spontaneous brain complexity.
Compared to placebo, 2C-B and psilocybin selectively reduced intranetwork sFC, while broadly increasing between-network and
subcortical-cortical connectivity. Compared to psilocybin, 2C-B exhibited less pronounced reductions in between-network dFC but
elicited elevations in transmodal sFC. Both compounds yielded spatially divergent increases in gFC yet produced similar increases in
brain complexity. Using PET density modelling, the spatial distribution of neural effects aligned with documented differences in
monoaminergic transporter and serotonergic receptor binding afﬁnity beyond 5-HT2A, highlighting the role of pharmacology in
shaping functional dynamics. Lastly, we show behavioural markers of psychedelic effects are reﬂected by the decoupling of the
transmodal axis of functional brain organisation. Together, our ﬁndings highlight 2C-B as a useful new addition to the study of
psychedelic neuroscience and may motivate new pharmacotherapy strategies.
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295–3307; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-026-03447-0

INTRODUCTION
There is currently intense clinical interest in the use of
psychedelics for a range of neuropsychiatric disorders. Current
research suggests that “classical” candidate compounds such as
psilocybin partly exert their therapeutic effects by temporarily
disrupting maladaptive functional brain organisation via 5-HT2A
agonism [1, 2]. Several human resting-state functional magnetic
resonance imaging (rsfMRI) studies have reported classical
psychedelics acutely decrease blood-oxygen-level-dependent
(BOLD) signal variance and broadly increase functional connectivity (FC) across the neocortex [3, 4]. These ﬁndings underlie several
theories implicating reduced functional network segregation and
increased neural signal complexity (often referred to as entropy)
as the basis of psychedelic action [5]. As the ﬁeld advances, there
is now growing attention towards next-generation psychedelics
which may elicit similar cortical effects [6]. Developing compounds
that induce milder, shorter, or more tolerable altered states of
consciousness may be more feasible to scale in clinical practice
while offering new mechanistic insights due to diverging
pharmacodynamics [7, 8].
One such compound is the novel phenethylamine 4-bromo-2,5dimethoxyphenethylamine (2C-B). While 2C-B is the most

frequently used novel psychedelic among recreational drug users
[9] and has a history of therapeutic use [10], scarce clinical
research data exists on its effects. Compared to the prototypical
psychedelic tryptamine psilocybin, 2C-B appears to induce less
subjective impairment and dysphoria at comparable doses, while
producing similar perceptual and cognitive effects [11, 12],
making it potentially easier to tolerate. A partial agonist, 2C-B
engages multiple serotonin receptors beyond 5-HT2A, including
5-HT1A, 5-HT1B and 5-HT2C while sharing a similar primary binding
proﬁle to psilocin, the active biometabolite of psilocybin [13–16].
Experiential differences between these two compounds may be
attributed to their functional selectivity for 5-HT2A receptors; with
2C-B showing approximately tenfold greater selectivity for 5-HT2A
over 5-HT1A compared to psilocybin, which may bias downstream
signalling cascades [14, 15]. In parallel, it is plausible that any of
2C-B’s distinct entactogenic and cortical effects are due to its
reversal of monoamine transporters otherwise trivial to classical
psychedelics [14, 17–19].
Polypharmacology is thus likely to contribute to distinct neural
circuits being modulated by distinct psychedelics, given the
differing role of monoaminergic systems on cortical signalling [20].
Neuromodulatory systems tune the neural “gain” of receptive

1
Department of Neuropsychology and Psychopharmacology, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht, the Netherlands. 2Penn Lifespan Informatics and
Neuroimaging Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. 3Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. ✉email: p.mallaroni@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Received: 21 October 2024 Revised: 18 December 2025 Accepted: 25 January 2026
Published online: 3 February 2026

P. Mallaroni et al.

3296
neuronal populations [21] thereby modulating inter-areal communication, with pronounced effects at a network level [22, 23].
Under psychedelics, changes in neural dynamics and phenomenology have been attributed to distinct serotonergic receptors
[24–27]. Some studies have retrospectively investigated such
dependencies for brain organisation and subjective experience
across psychedelics [28, 29]. However, within-subject comparative
studies, which minimise interstudy and intersubject variability, are
still lacking. Moreover, heterogeneous rsfMRI approaches lacking
independent replication have been assessed as experiential
markers with varying degrees of success [30, 31]. Understanding
that no single measure of psychedelic brain effects is yet superior,
a perhaps more cogent aim is to deﬁne focal neural regions across
psychedelics that are differentially sensitive to drug-induced
perturbations - regardless of the assessment method.
Here, we examined 2C-B’s effects on functional brain organisation using a double-blind, crossover design against placebo and
matched doses of psilocybin as an active drug control condition in
healthy volunteers using 7 Tesla rsfMRI. A ﬁrst direct comparison
of two structurally distinct psychedelics, we hypothesised that 2CB would elicit alterations to spatiotemporal benchmarks of brain
organisation consistent with a primary 5-HT2A mechanism of
action, that is – the presence of a small-world network
organisation and increased neural complexity. Given 2C-B’s
reported afﬁnity for monoamine transporters, targets not signiﬁcantly engaged by psilocybin, we further hypothesised that this
secondary binding proﬁle may underlie topographical differences
between the two compounds. To do so, we employed a
pharmacology-guided approach leveraging positron emission
tomography (PET) mapping. Finally, we investigated potential
relationships between multivariate markers of brain organisation
and subjective experience.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
All aspects of this study (trial register NL8813) were approved
(NL73539.068.20) by the Academic Hospital and University’s Medical
Ethics Committee of Maastricht University. All procedures were conducted
according to the Declaration of Helsinki (1964), amended in Fortaleza
(Brazil, October 2013) and were in accordance with the Medical Research
Involving Human Subjects Act (WMO). A permit for obtaining, storing, and
administering 2C-B and psilocybin was obtained from the Dutch Drug
Enforcement Administration. All participants provided written informed
consent prior to participation after receiving a full explanation of the study
procedures, potential adverse reactions, their legal rights and responsibilities, and their right to withdraw at any time without consequences.

Participants
Twenty-two healthy participants (11 female) aged 19–35 years (mean ± SD:
25 ± 4 years) were recruited by word of mouth and advertisement shared
via the Maastricht University social media platform. Participants were
required to have had at least one previous lifetime psychedelic exposure
(e.g., psilocybin, mescaline, ayahuasca, LSD), but no exposure within the
past 3 months. Those with psychiatric, major medical, endocrine, or
neurological conditions, pregnant or lactating women, those not using
reliable contraception, concomitant drug use, with a history of adverse
reactions to psychedelics, with uncorrected or abnormal vision, or MRI
contraindications were excluded (See Supplementary Materials S1 for a full
inclusion criterion and testing procedures).

Study design
Healthy adults were enrolled in a double-blind, placebo-controlled,
randomised crossover design with three acute fMRI imaging sessions to
investigate the effects of 2C-B and psilocybin on functional brain
architecture relative to placebo. Participants underwent imaging during
dosing sessions with 15 mg psilocybin, 20 mg 2C-B, or placebo (bittering
agent). Acute rsfMRI was conducted approximately 110 min after each
intervention administration. Doses of psilocybin and 2C-B were chosen
based on psychotropic equivalence extrapolated from prior study data.
This was originally corroborated by behavioural assessments of the sample

[12], with additional details on dose selection, purchase, blinding and
sample size estimation provided in the companion manuscript [12] and
Supplementary Materials S1.1.

Altered state questionnaires
Following scanner exit, participants completed three retrospective selfreport questionnaires. These included the Amsterdam Resting-State
Questionnaire (ARSQ), administered approximately 130 minutes postdrug intake, which assessed ongoing cognition during rsfMRI [32].
Additionally, participants completed the 5 Dimensions of Altered States
Questionnaire (5D-ASC) and the Ego Dissolution Inventory (EDI), approximately 360 minutes post-drug intake, to evaluate subjective effects
retrospectively [33, 34]. Self-report visual analogue scales (VAS), measuring
subjective high and effect intensity, were also completed immediately
before and after the rsfMRI session (approximately 90 and 120 minutes
post-drug intake). These assessments were used to reassess dose
equivalency [12]. For complete inventory descriptions, see Supplementary
Section S2.

fMRI acquisition and preprocessing
Participants underwent one imaging session per acute dosing visit separated
by a two-week washout, comprising structural imaging, magnetic resonance
spectroscopy, task and rsfMRI. Across visits, imaging was performed within
subjects at a ﬁxed time of day to minimise diurnal effects [35]. Images were
acquired on a Siemens MAGNETOM 7 T MRI scanner. Imaging parameters
and procedures are listed in Supplementary Materials S3.1
Neuroimaging data were preprocessed using fMRIPrep 22.1.1 [36]. For
details, see Supplementary Materials S3.2–S3.3. Unsmoothed, preprocessed functional images were denoised using CONN 22a [37]. Following
linear detrending, we implemented voxel-wise confound regression by
regressing out, 1) physiological noise from ﬁve aCompCor principal
components [38], comprising white matter and cerebrospinal ﬂuid signals,
2) 12 motion parameters (3 translations, 3 rotations and ﬁrst-order
derivatives), 3), censoring regressors devised using the Artifact Detection
Toolbox (ART), with a global signal threshold of z > 3 and a framewise
displacement (FD) threshold of > 0.5 mm, 4) constant and linear
session BOLD signal trends to minimise the inﬂuence of slow trends and
initial magnetisation non-steady-state transients. Timeseries were ﬁltered
using a 0.008–0.09 Hz band-pass ﬁlter. Our motion exclusion criterion
comprised a mean FD greater than 0.5 mm and > 20% outlier scans in any
scanning session. Quality control yielded 20 subjects, with no signiﬁcant
motion differences across conditions for either mean FD or censoring. To
account for any possible residual motion artefacts, we replicated our
ﬁndings using FD as a nuisance regressor. Secondary replication
incorporating global signal regression (GSR) during denoising was also
performed, given its inﬂuence on resting-state network composition [39].
See Supplementary Materials S13–S16 for additional information.
Denoised BOLD timeseries were next parcellated into 232 regions,
comprising 200 cortical regions of interest (ROIs) according to an
augmented version of the functional parcellation of Schaefer et al. and
32 subcortical ROIs from the Tian atlas [40, 41]. In addition, we repeated
our primary analyses using a ﬁner-grain 454 region parcellation (comprising Schaefer 400 and Tian 54, see Supplementary Materials S15).

Functional organisation benchmarking
We derived spatiotemporal measures of resting-state network organisation
at both an edge and regional level to benchmark 2C-B’s effects. These
measures (illustrated in Fig. 1) have been extensively studied in the
psychedelic literature [3, 4, 30]. All connectomic measures were
contextualized using the Yeo 17 network classes [42].
Static functional connectivity (sFC) was computed by generating
Pearson’s r between the timeseries of all pairwise combinations of 232
regions, with all r-values Fisher z-transformed. Global functional connectivity (gFC) serving as a proxy for node centrality, was derived as the
average Fisher z-transformed Pearson correlation from each region to all
others. We focused on signiﬁcant edges ﬂagged by sFC statistics [43, 44].
To assess dynamic FC variability (dFC), we computed the variance of
dynamic conditional correlations (DCC). DCC is a non-parametric modelbased approach devised for assessing time-varying correlations [45]. A
framewise approach, it offers superior test-retest reliability compared to
other dFC methods, which often face window artefacts and require
arbitrary hyperparameters [46]. Variance was calculated for all possible
pairwise regional DCC combinations [47–49].

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

P. Mallaroni et al.

3297
We selected and ranked spontaneous signal complexity measures
according to previous replicability and association with psychedelic effects
based on McCulloch et al.‘s work, using the COPBET toolbox [31]. Regional
signal complexity was characterised using sample entropy (sampEn),
deﬁned as the negative logarithm of the conditional probability that two
vectors of length m (set to 2) are dissimilar within a threshold distance r
(set at 0.3 times the standard deviation of the regional timeseries) and that
this dissimilarity persists when the vector length increases to m + 1 [50].
From the same selection criteria, we also derived edgewise DCC Shannon
entropy (dccEn), whole-brain Lempel-Ziv entropy (zivEn) and path-length
degree-distribution entropy (degreeEn). See Supplementary Materials S4.
for information on each measure.

subjects and r being regional coherence change scores (drug-placebo) per
drug for all nodes (Xnxr), and Y reﬂecting experiential measures, with n
being subjects and d corresponding to behavioural change scores (drugplacebo) for each of our 6 retrospective dimensions (5D-ASC, EDI) per drug
(Ynxd). This decomposition yields orthogonal latent variables (LVs)
associated with a pattern of neural activity (i.e., multivariate coherence)
and subjective effects [57]. We assessed overall LV signiﬁcance using
permutation testing (10 000 permutations), and loading stability by
generating bootstrap ratios (10 000 bootstraps). Overall model ﬁndings
were also supported using 5-fold cross-validation, to derive out-of-sample
correlation estimates. See Supplementary Materials S6 for additional
information pertaining to the analysis rationale and methodology.

Pharmacological action mapping

Statistics

Molecular densities were estimated from PET tracer studies for relevant
serotonin receptors (5-HT1A, 5-HT1B, 5-HT2A) and monoamine transporters
(serotonin reuptake [SERT], dopamine reuptake [DAT] and norepinephrine
reuptake transporter [NET]). Targets were selected from literature
demonstrating functional afﬁnity of either 2C-B or psilocybin for these
sites [14–16]. Volumetric PET images were registered to standard space,
averaged across participants within each study, and then parcellated into
ROIs. Receptors having more than one mean image of the same tracer (5HT1B) were combined using a weighted average. Regional values for
cortical and subcortical areas were z-scored independently before their
integration for analysis, considering established differences in radioligand
uptake between these structures [51]. For details on each PET dataset, see
[52] and Supplementary Table 1.
Dominance analysis was used to determine the relative importance of
each PET density map in predicting the spatial variation of our regional
contrast t-statistics for our primary imaging benchmarks (nodal sum sFC &
dFC, sampEn). Dominance analysis aims to establish the relative
signiﬁcance (or “dominance”) of each independent variable in relation to
the overall ﬁt (adjusted R2) of the multiple linear regression. However,
dominance analysis does not inherently correct for spatial autocorrelation.
We therefore independently investigated the associative validity of the top
topographical contributors for each metric by performing spatial-nullcorrected correlations. For each contrast (e.g., 2C-B vs placebo), we
selected the top three receptor–metric pairs based on the highest
explained variance in the dominance analysis (18 pairs per contrast, 54
pairs in total). For each pair, we performed Moran spatial-null-corrected
Pearson correlations. Spatially constrained null distributions (10,000
iterations) were generated using Moran Spectral Randomisation, as
implemented in the BrainSpace toolbox. This approach, originally
proposed in the ecology literature [53], is particularly suited for comparing
spatial maps where geodesic distances cannot be preserved (e.g., atlases
incorporating subcortical structures) [54]. Resulting p-values were
corrected for multiple comparisons using a false discovery rate (FDR)
procedure. See Supplementary Materials S5. for additional details.

For all analyses, the alpha criterion was set at p < 0.05 following
appropriate multiple comparison correction. Data normality was assessed
using the Shapiro–Wilk test and homogeneity of variance was evaluated
using Levene’s test where applicable for parametric tests. A nonparametric
network-based statistic (NBS) approach [58] derived from the NBS toolbox
was used to assess alterations to connectomic measures in a repeated
measures design (see Supplementary Materials S8). Signiﬁcant NBS (10 000
permutations) multiple-comparisons corrected edges were used as masks
for post-hoc two-tail t-tests assessments. Changes to regional rsfMRI
measures and behavioural outcomes were assessed by linear mixed effect
models (LMEMs) with drug condition as a main ﬁxed effect and participant
as a random intercept. Follow-up assessments were performed with paired
two-tail t-tests after Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR)
correction across signiﬁcant ROIs. For behavioural outcomes, Tukey’s
method was applied.

Experiential mapping

We assessed the behavioural relevance of “net” drug effects of both 2C-B
and psilocybin on functional organisation by investigating the predictive
value of regional multivariate coherence (see Fig. 1). Multivariate
coherence, as described herein, is deﬁned as the Pearson correlation
across measurements for a particular node. For each participant, primary
nodal psychedelic effect measures (nodal sum sFC & dFC, sampEn) were zscored across regions to control for inter-feature variability. Pearson
correlations were then performed for each pair of regional feature vectors,
forming an ROI x ROI matrix per participant, ultimately summed to
generate a measure of nodal coherence strength per region (see Fig. 1). By
performing a multivariate second-order integration of our measures of
interest, this approach provides a simple heuristic of “net” drug effects by
capturing the functional contribution of a region relative to the rest of the
brain. This approach is equivalent to the study of annotation similarity
networks [55], grounded in the principle of homophilic mixing, demonstrating that connected brain regions tend to share similar features such as
local neural dynamics [56].
We employed a multilevel partial-least-squares (PLS, accounting for
inter-individual variability) analysis to assess the relationship between
spatially distributed drug effects on regional coherence and corresponding
subjective effects (https://github.com/rmarkello/pyls). PLS is an unsupervised multivariate statistical approach that relates two feature matrices (X,
Y) by estimating their weighted linear combination to maximise their
covariance. Here, X corresponds to multivariate coherence, with n being

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

RESULTS
We sought to deﬁne 2C-B’s effects on resting-state functional
brain organisation and explore relative differences to psilocybin
across a range of established psychedelic neuroimaging
benchmarks.
Administration of 2C-B and psilocybin yields comparable
psychoactive effects
We ﬁrst aimed to ensure psychotropic equivalence during restingstate fMRI acquisition (Fig. 2, Table 1). Analyses revealed a
signiﬁcant drug effect on all VAS items immediately before
(approximately 90 min post-administration) and after (approximately 120 min post-administration) resting-state acquisition
indicating comparable subjective effect intensity at the time of
acquisition. The maximal drug effects (emax) for our real-time
measures did not show signiﬁcant differences between 2C-B and
psilocybin, consistent with previous ﬁndings [12]. Retrospective
dysphoric experiences related to changes in selfhood (‘ego
dissolution’), speciﬁcally anxious ego dissolution (AED), but not
the Ego Dissolution Index (EDI), as well as the overall 5D-ASC (ASC)
score, were signiﬁcantly higher under psilocybin compared to
both placebo and 2C-B.
Following scanner exit, participants reported the phenomenological content of their resting-state mentation using the ARSQ.
Analyses demonstrated a signiﬁcant drug effect across 6/10
dimensions of resting-state cognition, with numerically large
increases for both drugs relative to placebo in discontinuity of
mind and self-referential thinking. However, neither compound
exhibited signiﬁcant differences in any ARSQ dimension during
acquisition. Particularly, measures of in-scanner arousal (sleepiness) and comfort did not show signiﬁcant differences.
Measures of brain organisation are differentially affected by
2C-B and psilocybin
Widespread changes in spatiotemporal brain organisation were
observed under both drugs (see Fig. 3). All outcomes were largely
consistent after controlling for mean framewise displacement,
across different parcellation schemes and global signal regression
(see Supplementary Materials S14–S16).

P. Mallaroni et al.

3298

Fig. 1 Analysis workﬂow schematic. We ﬁrst benchmarked functional organisation: static FC quantiﬁed the mean correlation between ROIs,
with global FC derived as a second-order nodal map of mean connectivity strength; dynamic FC captured the variance of time-varying FC
ﬂuctuations using autoregressive model-based conditional correlations; and sample entropy measured BOLD signal complexity as the
negative log-probability that similar patterns remain similar over time. We next computed multivariate regional coherence, by integrating
across the nodal strength of ﬁrst-order metrics. For each subject and condition, we vectorized summed static FC and dynamic FC, and entropy
values across all regions, z-scored these metrics, and correlated them across ROIs. This produces a feature similarity matrix, after which
summed each region’s row-wise similarities to produce regional coherence scores, showcasing how strongly a region functionally aligns with
the rest of the brain. Finally, to relate system-wide changes in coherence to behaviour, we applied a multilevel Partial Least Squares (PLS)
analysis on per subject change maps (drug-placebo). This models covariance between two data domains (regional coherence change per
drug and subjective effect change per drug), incorporating a design matrix to account for repeated measures. PLS applies singular value
decomposition to extract latent variables that capture maximal covariance between brain and behaviour.

For sFC, NBS identiﬁed widespread differences in sFC as indicated
by a main effect of drug (pNBS = 0.0421, 229 nodes, 1922 edges).
Psilocybin signiﬁcantly reduced within-network connectivity for
visual network A & B (VISA/B) and the default mode network C
(DMNC), compared to placebo. Between-network connectivity,
particularly across the frontoparietal network A & B (FPNA/B), salience
network A & B (SANA/B), and DMNA/B/C, was also signiﬁcantly
increased. In addition, cortical-subcortical connectivity was broadly
increased. 2C-B showed similar effects, with reductions in withinnetwork sFC for VISB and DMNC, but showed converse increases in
FPNC. Increases in between-network connectivity were focal, notably
between FPNA/B and VISA/B, and SALB with transmodal networks.
Subcortical-cortical sFC, especially involving DMNB and VISB, was

signiﬁcantly increased. Between-drug comparisons revealed that
psilocybin had a generally greater increasing effect on betweennetwork sFC relative to 2C-B, particularly for connectivity spanning
the DMNB and somatomotor network B (SMNB), whereas 2C-B
showed greater increases in DMNA-FPNC connectivity. These results
align with a widespread cortical effect.
For dFC, NBS analyses also revealed a widespread effect of drug
(pNBS = 0.0135, 231 nodes, 1755 edges). Both psilocybin and 2C-B
signiﬁcantly induced strong, nonspeciﬁc whole-brain reductions in
between-network dFC variance compared to placebo, with the
greatest decreases observed in subcortical-cortical (DMNB, FPNA/B)
and VISA-FPNA connectivity variance. No clear within-network
effects were visible under either compound. Post-hoc
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

P. Mallaroni et al.

3299

Fig. 2 Self-reported measures of drug intensity and phenomenology. A Time courses of each VAS measurement. Data are presented as
mean ± SEM (brackets) relative to scanning and phenomenological measures. B Retrospective phenomenological measures (5D-ASC and EDI).
Data are presented as means + standard error (1.5). AED, anxious ego dissolution; OBE, oceanic boundlessness; ASC, altered state of
consciousness; EDI, ego dissolution inventory; VIR, vigilance reduction; AUD, auditory alterations; VR, visual restructuralisation.

comparisons across compounds revealed overall spatially distributed greater reductions in dFC under psilocybin relative to 2CB for between-network dFC. Edgewise complexity (dccEn) did not
exhibit signiﬁcant changes (pNBS > 0.1, see Supplementary
Materials S11).
In parallel, we calculated regional measures of gFC and several
complexity measures (Fig. 3B, Supplementary Materials S4). gFC
analyses showed signiﬁcant increases in mean FC across most
regions for both substances compared to placebo. Under
psilocybin, notable increases were seen in the left dorsolateral
and bilateral ventral prefrontal cortex, inferior frontal gyrus, and
left ventral posterior thalamus, with decreases in the right
temporal pole, medial amygdala, dorsal posterior thalamus, and
occipital lobe. For 2C-B, the strongest gFC increases occurred in
the right precuneus, lateral prefrontal cortex, left posterior
cingulate cortex, and right insula, with reductions in the bilateral
temporal poles, right dorsal posterior thalamus, and left nucleus
accumbens. Between drugs, psilocybin generally led to greater
gFC increases compared to 2C-B, particularly in the left postcentral
gyrus, medial cingulate cortex, ventral posterior thalamus, and
frontal eye ﬁelds. In contrast, 2C-B showed greater increases in the
right extrastriate visual cortex, bilateral posterior cingulate, medial
prefrontal cortex, and left dorsal anterior thalamus. Controlling for
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

motion, GSR exhibited drug-dependent effects (see Supplementary Materials S16).
Analyses of regional complexity using sampEn revealed similar
effects for 2C-B and psilocybin, indicating an increase in timeseries
complexity. Speciﬁcally, both compounds signiﬁcantly increased
sampEn in the bilateral extrastriate/primary visual cortex and the
anterior ventral thalamus, with no signiﬁcant differences observed
between the compounds. Whole-brain signal complexity (zivEn
but not degreeEn) was also signiﬁcantly increased relative to
placebo, with no signiﬁcant differences between compounds (see
Supplementary S11).
Changes to functional brain organisation follow
pharmacology
Through dominance analysis, we sought to quantify the contributions of pharmacological receptor and transporter maps to the
spatial variance of our primary regional metrics (see Fig. 4A).
Separate models were generated for each primary outcome
measure (sFC, dFC and sampEn nodal sum t-stats) per contrast and
were supported by independent spatial correlations (Fig. 4B) to
characterise their topographical overlap. Across 54 possible
models, we found that for both 2C-B and psilocybin, dFC changes
relative to placebo were best explained (psilocybin: 56.89%, 2C-B:

P. Mallaroni et al.

3300
Table 1.

Comparison of subjective effects under 2C-B, psilocybin and placebo.
Psilocybin
(mean ± SEM)

2C-B
(mean ± SEM)

Placebo
(mean ± SEM)

F

p-value

<0.001

Drug high VAS (% score)
emax

83.2 ± 3.94***

75.55 ± 6***

7.43 ± 3.25

98.15

± 90 min

38.5 ± 7.48**

42.95 ± 8.73***

5 ± 3.12

11.25

<0.001

± 120 min

67.25 ± 6.62***

62.8 ± 7.54***

1.45 ± 0.81

48.21

<0.001

emax

76.25 ± 4.62***

75.9 ± 5.11***

8 ± 3.24

93.56

<0.001

± 90 min

39.5 ± 7.24***

40.5 ± 8.6***

4.5 ± 2.85

11.78

<0.001

± 120 min

62.6 ± 5.52***

59.35 ± 6.8***

1.2 ± 0.75

65.62

<0.001
<0.001

Any drug effect VAS (% score)

Amsterdam Resting State Questionnaire (ARSQ) (mean score)
Discontinuity of Mind

4.15 ± 0.18***

3.65 ± 0.18**

2.92 ± 0.21

19.02

Theory of Mind

3.87 ± 0.19**

3.44 ± 0.25

2.88 ± 0.22

6.03

0.01

Self

3.96 ± 0.19**

3.54 ± 0.23*

2.93 ± 0.23

8.08

<0.001

Planning

3.11 ± 0.3

3.04 ± 0.24

2.57 ± 0.21

1.53

0.23

Sleepiness

3.28 ± 0.22

2.82 ± 0.28*

3.58 ± 0.21

3.51

0.04

Comfort

3.89 ± 0.19

3.53 ± 0.27

3.38 ± 0.2

1.6

0.22

Somatic Awareness

3.09 ± 0.16

3.16 ± 0.21

3.1 ± 0.21

0.05

0.95

Health Concern

2.09 ± 0.22

2.39 ± 0.22*

1.68 ± 0.14

4.2

0.02

Visual Thoughts

3.65 ± 0.26*

3.35 ± 0.23

2.93 ± 0.23

4.38

0.02

Verbal Thoughts

3.31 ± 0.29

2.93 ± 0.24

2.67 ± 0.21

2.53

0.09

5 Dimensions Altered States of Consciousness (ASC) Scale (% score)
Total ASC score

21.41 ± 2.48***##

14.97 ± 2.19***

1.22 ± 0.34

50.38

<0.001

Oceanic boundlessness

23.18 ± 3.74***

15.74 ± 3.24***

0.72 ± 0.26

20.11

<0.001

Anxious ego-dissolution

15.74 ± 3.17***#

7.72 ± 1.54*

0.77 ± 0.28

16.66

<0.001

Visionary restructuralization

28.09 ± 3.8***

25.49 ± 4.8***

0.72 ± 0.29

19.59

<0.001

Auditory alterations

11.72 ± 2.68***

6.14 ± 1.72

0.67 ± 0.3

11.23

<0.001

Reductions of vigilance

30.25 ± 4.5***

21.9 ± 3.95**

4.62 ± 1.42

16.17

<0.001

17.63 ± 3.92***

16.1 ± 4.6**

0.64 ± 0.26

8.15

0.001

Ego dissolution inventory (EDI) (% score)
Total EDI score

*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 compared with placebo; #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001 compared with 2C-B.

64.38%) by an inverse spatial relationship with 5-HT2A receptor
density indicating that as dFC variance decreases relative to
placebo, 5-HT2A spatial density increases. Similarly, sampEn was
best explained for each drug (psilocybin: 48.26%, 2C-B: 45.40%) by
an inverse spatial relationship with 5-HT1A spatial density,
suggesting increased signal complexity relative to placebo
correlates with lower 5-HT1A expression. For 5-HT1B, there was a
signiﬁcant spatial positive relationship with sFC under psilocybin
(41.89%), suggesting greater increases in sFC for regions of high
5-HT1B density.
Importantly, when assessing relative differences across drugs,
DAT density was a strong determinant of topological differences in
sFC between 2C-B and psilocybin (65.75%). Speciﬁcally, areas with
greater sFC under 2C-B relative to psilocybin correlated with higher
DAT density and vice versa. Whereas SERT was found to be a
strong contributor to sampEn between-drug differences (49.25%)
independent spatial correlations revealed a non-signiﬁcant,
positive relationship. Lastly, 5-HT1A was found to also signiﬁcantly
contribute to between-drug differences (34.36%): in regions with
lower 5-HT1A density, psilocybin tended to exhibit a stronger
reducing effect on dFC variance compared to 2C-B (and vice versa).
Multivariate neural effects show distinct associations with
subjective experience
We lastly sought to understand how net effects on functional brain
organisation may relate to a participant’s subjective experience. To

do so, we generated second-order coherence scores, to understand how distinct compounds modulate the spatial alignment of
otherwise largely uncorrelated functional signatures across the
brain (see Supplementary Materials S12), given that the choice of
these measurements themselves vary extensively per study. This
shared modulation helps further reﬂect regional shifts in
functional integration. As depicted in Fig. 5A, multivariate
coherence followed a unimodal-transmodal topographical organisation (see Supplementary S7 for a description). Primary
networks (e.g., VIS, SM) closely coupled to sensory input, showed
high multivariate coherence and responded convergently across
measures, while more ﬂexible heteromodal networks exhibited
lower coherence, responding divergently. Levene’s testing indicated the variance of regional coherence scores differed across
conditions (W = 22 p < 0.0001), reﬂecting a differentiation in
regional signatures (see Supplementary S12 for group-level
regional statistics).
We next applied a multilevel PLS analysis to identify a
multivariate mapping of maximum covariance between druginduced effects on brain organisation and subjective effects.
Permutation testing revealed a statistically signiﬁcant latent
variable (LV1), explaining 33.13% of total cross-drug experiential
scores (pperm = 0.0291, Fig. 5B). Across contrasts, regional coherence LV1 scores were positively associated with experiential
LV1 scores (overall: rin-sample = 0.40, rout-sample = 0.32, pFDR = 0.0151;
psilocybin: rin-sample = 0.79, pFDR = 0.0001, 2C-B: rin-sample = 0.53,
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

P. Mallaroni et al.

3301

Fig. 3 rsfMRI psychedelic effect benchmarks. A Signiﬁcant differences in drug-mediated static and dynamic FC across all contrasts. Cortical
networks are based on the 17-network, 200-parcel Schaefer-Yeo parcellation (Schaefer et al. 2017) augmented with 32 subcortical regions
from Tian et al. [41]. Red indicates drug-mediated increases in interregional FC, and blue indicates decreases. Grey hues represent the
proportion of signiﬁcant edges for a given Yeo 17 network pair relative to the total number of signiﬁcant edges. Regions are ordered left and
then right within each network. A Yeo 7 aggregate colourmap is provided below each matrix. B Signiﬁcant differences in drug-mediated
regional gFC (i.e., the average of a given seed region’s FC to all others) and sampEn (the complexity of a regional timeseries) across all
contrasts. VIS, visual; SMN, somatomotor network; DAN, dorsal attention network; SAL, salience network; LIM, limbic; FPN, frontoparietal
network; DMN, default mode network; TPN (temporoparietal network); SCN (subcortical network).

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

P. Mallaroni et al.

3302

Fig. 4 Pharmacology-guided mapping of rsfMRI outcomes. A PET molecular density distributions of primary and secondary drug afﬁnities
are displayed. Values are expressed as raw expression values prior to z-scoring. B Dominance analysis for each contrast and measure of
interest. Dominance analysis distributes the ﬁt of the model across input receptor maps such that the contribution of each receptor can be
assessed and compared to other input maps. The percent contribution of each input map is deﬁned as the map’s dominance normalized by
the total ﬁt (Radj2) of the model. Corresponding ranked scatter plots of top predictive receptor-outcome pairs are displayed, following spatial
autocorrelation-preserving permutation testing Contrast t-statistics are plotted relative to z-scored receptor distributions.

pFDR = 0.0151), suggesting LV1 captured a pattern in multivariate
coherence that is positively associated to subjective effects.
To evaluate spatial patterns of covariance relevant to each
drug’s effects, we extracted LV1 regional loadings per condition
after bootstrapping (Fig. 5C, see Supplementary S12 for behavioural loadings). Regions with positive loadings indicate that
greater coherence following drug intake is linked to stronger
subjective effects, while regions with negative loadings suggest
that greater coherence in those areas is linked to weaker
subjective effects and vice versa. Under psilocybin, the strongest
negative loadings were in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), including
SALB, DMNA, and FPNB (e.g., bilateral ventral, dorsal, and lateral
PFC), while positive loadings appeared in primary sensory regions

(e.g., striate/extrastriate cortex, precentral gyrus). 2C-B showed a
similar spatial pattern, with subtle regional differences. Negative
loadings were strongest in regions associated with FPNB/C and
DMNC (e.g., bilateral inferior parietal lobe, dorsal and lateral PFC),
and positive loadings appeared in areas linked to SMA/B and DANB
(e.g., primary/secondary motor cortex, postcentral gyrus).
Overall, LV1 suggests that a transmodal cortical gradient best
characterises psychedelic effects. Cortical bootstrap ratios correlated with the primary gradient of cortical FC [59] and the
sensorimotor-associative (S-A) axis of brain organisation [60]
following spin permutation tests (FC gradient: r = 0.50, pFDRspin <
0.0001; S-A axis: r = −0.51, pFDRspin < 0.0001). Across psychedelics,
regional neurobehavioral markers are thus marked by highly
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

P. Mallaroni et al.

3303

Fig. 5 Multivariate contributions to behaviour. A Top: Representative group-level multivariate coherence matrices per drug. For a given pair
of brain regions, metrics are correlated (Pearson r) to yield a measure of net drug effects per corresponding edge and aggregated to produce
regional coherence scores for subsequent analysis. Bottom: boxplot median distribution of group-level regional multivariate coherence scores
(nodal sum of each matrix) per condition. B The ﬁrst LV (LV1) was statistically signiﬁcant, concerning null model permutation testing in grey
(10 000 permutations, depicted as grey boxplots). The absolute model explained variance are represented as dots. C Regional model loading
contributions for LV1. Warm values indicate a positive contribution to the LV whereas cold values represent a negative contribution. Top: Brain
renders represent derived loading bootstrap ratios (calculated across 10 000 iterations). Bottom: corresponding raw model loadings are
aggregated below into their respective Yeo-17 networks, ranked according to their means and plotted with their standard error of means (1.5).
Network loading sign directions follow bootstrap ratio scores. VIS, visual; SMN, somatomotor network; DAN, dorsal attention network; SAL,
salience network; LIM, limbic; FPN, frontoparietal network; DMN, default mode network; TPN (temporoparietal network); SCN (subcortical
network).

reduced multivariate coherence in transmodal cortices (including
regions such as the PFC and temporoparietal junction) and to a
lesser degree, increased coherence in sensorimotor cortices (see
Supplementary S12).
DISCUSSION
This study aimed to characterise the neural correlates of 2C-B
using an integrative approach that combines spatiotemporal
measures of functional organisation, molecular pharmacology,
and subjective experience. Consistent with our hypothesis, we
found that 2C-B exhibits empirical properties similar to classical
psychedelics, including network desegregation and increased
spontaneous BOLD complexity, irrespective of variations in rsfMRI
thought content or effect intensity. By examining functional (sub)
networks, we identiﬁed coupling changes to subcortical and
prefrontal regions as well as enhanced FC between large-scale
networks. Furthermore, we conﬁrm that regional differences
between 2C-B and psilocybin effects are associated with reported

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

pharmacodynamic differences in 5-HT1A and DAT afﬁnity, with
serotonergic receptors sharing a common role in deﬁning
functional dynamics. Characterising nonlinear psychedelic effects,
we isolated neurobehavioral markers for each compound,
contributing to a net destabilisation of prefrontal cortices. Our
ﬁndings suggest that 2C-B is a valuable tool for psychedelic
neuroscience, while enhancing our understanding of the differing
neurobiological mechanisms of psychedelics.
One of the strongest ﬁndings in psychedelic research is the
reduction of intranetwork sFC for the VIS and DMN, often termed
network “disintegration”. This effect is observed across various
psychedelics and entactogens, such as lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD), ayahuasca, dimethyltryptamine (DMT), psilocybin, and
MDMA [43, 61–64]. Given 2C-B’s compatible phenomenology, its
similarity here is expected. Previous studies [30] have often used
broad network deﬁnitions (e.g. Yeo 7) or methods like independent components analysis (ICA), which may overestimate intranetwork effects by examining coherent neural activity across
extended parts of the brain. Here for example, while within-

P. Mallaroni et al.

3304
network sFC was broadly reduced for the VIS under 2C-B and
psilocybin, only the DMNC (comprising the retrosplenial cortex,
parahippocampus, and anterior hippocampus) showed reduced
sFC. This supports the need for ﬁner (sub)network deﬁnition, as
otherwise highlighted by recent deep sampling showcasing focal
changes to hippocampal-cortical connectivity under psilocybin
[65] and dynamical clustering approaches [66].
It is theorised that the degree of whole-brain functional
integration underlies the depth of the psychedelic experience
[67]. Psychedelics with rich phenomenological proﬁles, such as
DMT show a substantial compression of functional cortical
organisation [43], whereas minimally “disruptive” compounds
such as MDMA or dexamphetamine, result in less extensive
changes [44, 68]. In our study, compared to psilocybin, 2C-B
demonstrated less extensive unimodal-transmodal internetwork
sFC (e.g., DMNB, SMA) and subcortical-cortical connectivity, but
exhibited enhanced transmodal connectivity (e.g. DMNC-FPNA).
The use of gFC revealed marked increases in connectivity within
thalamic nuclei involved in sensorimotor gating [69] and ﬂexible
network reconﬁguration [70] and substantial portions of the
neocortex for both compounds. Interestingly, 2C-B was associated
with marked increases in gFC and sFC compared to psilocybin for
areas such as the mPFC (subdivisions corresponding to the FPN
and DMN), which instead had broader neocortical effects. Sparse
increases in FPN sFC after MDMA administration [64] and
reductions in centrality after SSRIs have been observed [71].
Whereas our ﬁndings follow those of groups showing increased
transmodal and reduced unimodal gFC [43, 62, 72] diverging
ﬁndings have been identiﬁed [73, 74]. Further work is needed to
reconcile these differences given that incorporating GSR potentially taps into latent pharmacological properties (see Supplementary Materials S16.4 for a discussion).
Temporal assessments of brain organisation across substances
revealed signiﬁcant reductions in dFC variance across the brain
and increased spontaneous BOLD signal complexity. Notably, 2C-B
yielded less widespread reductions in dFC variance compared to
psilocybin while increases in regional entropy were consistent
between the two compounds, suggesting drug-speciﬁc differences in dampening large-scale connectivity ﬂuctuations may be
independent of their effects on local signal diversity. Although this
co-occurrence may appear counterintuitive, clustering-based
dynamical analyses provide a useful conceptual framework:
psychedelics increase the occupancy of globally coherent or
hyperconnected FC states, often with longer dwell times and
fewer out-of-state transitions, even as local BOLD signal complexity rises [75, 76]. This may support the view that psychedelics
stabilise large-scale attractor-like conﬁgurations within which
locally diverse dynamics unfold. Acute reductions in DCC-based
dFC variance parallel to numerically increased entropy, have also
been observed after inhalation of the dissociative hallucinogen
Salvia divinorum [48], indicating that entropy-driven signal
diversity does not necessarily entail greater variability in functional
coupling. By contrast, subacute increases in dFC variance have
been observed following psilocybin-assisted therapy for depression, interpreted as heightened “neural ﬂexibility” otherwise
absent in healthy volunteers [47, 49]. Further replication of this
measure is needed to validate the concept of neural ﬂexibility in
the acute psychedelic state relative to persisting effects.
Whole-brain complexity, which refers to the irreducibility of
brain activity from functional integration and differentiation, is
considered a hallmark of the phenomenological richness of
psychedelics [77]. Eliciting similar behavioural effects, 2C-B also
produced comparable increases in complexity to psilocybin. It
remains to be studied however whether this is a feature inherent
to 5-HT2A agonism, since MDMA or amphetamines have yet to be
fully assessed. We particularly observed increased complexity in
thalamic nuclei under psychedelics, aligning with the “thalamic
gating” model of psychedelic effects that suggest psychedelics

disinhibit thalamic connections, allowing more sensory information to reach the neocortex [78]. It should be noted that sparse
regional elevations in entropy were identiﬁed, with no signiﬁcant
changes in edge-based complexity. This may be reﬂective of our
choice of eyes-open rsfMRI to minimise arousal differences as it
provides a more “grounded” psychological state, akin to taskbased approaches where attention is directed towards external
stimuli rather than internal psychological processes. Studies
indicate that complexity scales with cognitive load [79] and
external stimulation under psilocybin [65], with no signiﬁcant
changes observed during eyes-open resting EEG [80]. A more
deﬁnitive consensus on the applicability of different complexity measures could thus be gleaned from block designs increasing
in task demand [81].
Designing novel pharmacophores with optimised receptor
proﬁles for psychedelic therapy will require a deeper understanding
of how pharmacodynamics scale to cortical markers of therapeutic
efﬁcacy. Extending a body of work relating 5-HT2A agonism to
altered regional dynamics [24–26], rank-based modelling indicated a
spatial correspondence whereby regional 5-HT2A expression aligned
most strongly with the distribution of greater dFC reductions under
psychedelics versus placebo. In parallel, regional 5-HT1A density
aligned with changes in sample entropy relative to placebo and with
dFC differences under psilocybin versus 2C-B. Co-expressed, cortical
5-HT1A heteroreceptors act in opponency to 5-HT2A to dampen the
spiking output of pyramidal neurons, attenuating excitability [82]
and perhaps by extension, signal complexity. Recent theoretical
modelling of cortical dynamics has proposed that betweencompound differences in 5-HT1A agonism may mediate psychological tolerability [83]. Considered a target for antidepressant
treatment [84], 5-HT1B expression showed a putative correspondence with psilocybin’s effects on sFC. 5-HT1B autoreceptors are
expressed on cortical serotonergic projections as well as the raphe
and basal ganglia [85, 86], reducing synaptic 5-HT release via
negative feedback [87]. Furthermore, 5-HT1B receptors can act as
heteroreceptors regulating the release of other neurotransmitters,
including GABA and dopamine [84]. Across compounds, higher DAT
density aligned with increased sFC under 2C-B relative to psilocybin.
This follows 2C-B’s secondary monoaminergic binding afﬁnity and
preclinical work showing increased striatal dopamine and reduced
EEG coherence post-administration [88]. Given reports of 2C-B
yielding less discontinuity of mind than other psychedelics [12, 89],
one possibility is that dopaminergic activity contribute to this proﬁle;
this requires prospective testing. The degree of cognitive lability
under psychedelics has been described to be reliant on cognitive
control mechanisms which mediate the balance between “stable”
and “divergent” thinking via the optimisation of prefrontal-striatal
dopaminergic transmission [90]. Leveraging dopaminergic modulation within psychedelic-assisted therapies could inform new
strategies for clinical populations characterised by cognitive rigidity.
Our analyses also sought to distinguish behavioural correlates
of “net” drug effects on brain function. Here, we found that
marked functional decoupling of transmodal cortices (i.e. reduced
coherence), which are involved in high-level cognitive processing
[59, 60] and increased coherence in unimodal regions may serve
as a useful neurobehavioral marker of psychedelic effects.
Importantly, our results indicate that the behavioural impacts of
each drug are particularly contingent on the destabilisation of
speciﬁc cortices within the DMN, FPN and SAL – together forming
the triple network of psychopathology posited to underlie the
symptomatology of mood disorders [91]. Given that interindividual variability in complex cognition under both normative [92]
and psychedelic states [93, 94] lies in these evolutionarily recent
brain regions, clarifying compound-speciﬁc regional markers may
provide future avenues for personalising psychedelic-assisted
therapy. Critically, PLS is a data-driven method that identiﬁes
maximally correlated, spatially distributed motifs; with the
resulting brain–behaviour mappings prioritising interindividual
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

P. Mallaroni et al.

3305
covariance over anatomical speciﬁcity. To move from spatial
motifs to actionable loci, compound selection based on their
ability to maximise neural therapeutic effects could be further
steered by intervention-based modelling approaches to identify
cortical perturbation points [95, 96]. It should be noted that
psychedelics impair some aspects of memory recollection in
humans [97] which may impact the ﬁdelity of post-hoc subjective
ratings and how they correlate with acute, objective brain
measures. Analysing task-based fMRI, we will next seek to
characterise how nonlinear dynamics may map onto relevant
real-time cognition, such as emotional decision-making.
The present ﬁndings are not without limitations. Firstly, a larger
sample would have enabled a more robust detection of betweendrug effects and behavioural correlates. While our crossover design
improves efﬁciency, the sample size limits sensitivity to moderate
drug differences, and non-signiﬁcant results should not be taken as
deﬁnitive evidence of equivalence. Efforts are ongoing to integrate
our results into a multi-group consortium characterising psychedelics. Secondly, we acknowledge there is a broader range of
molecular targets, as well as relevant complexity measures beyond
those validated by McCullough et al. [31] that may increase the
sensitivity of multivariate coherence. This is also compounded by
the current absence of in vivo 2C-B receptor occupancy data and
the nonspeciﬁcity of 5-HT2A PET tracers (CIMBI-36) for 5-HT2A/2C
receptors due to high sequence homology [7, 98], noting concerns
that receptor–function associations derived from population-level,
across-region spatial correlations are at best interpreted as
topographical alignment and may not reﬂect across-participant
or direct mechanistic effects [99]. Thirdly, the timing of our
subjective intensity queries makes it difﬁcult to ascertain whether
the resting-state fMRI acquisition aligned with the late onset phase
or peak psychoactive effects. The magnitude of observed effects
may thus differ according to the assessed temporal phase [73].
Finally, an empirical question persists: how does one best compare
“apples and oranges” in psychedelic neuroscience? The subjective
nature and variable duration of these experiences, coupled with a
complex underlying polypharmacology beyond 5-HT2A agonism,
raises signiﬁcant challenges for deﬁning in vivo equivalences. As
demonstrated here and elsewhere [44], matching single doses on
behavioural or cardiovascular outcomes may offer an ecologically
valid comparison. Although dose-ascending studies with multiple
active controls could better capture pharmacodynamic variability,
they are costly, burdensome for participants, and increase the risk
of order effects—especially given the persisting effects of
psychedelics [100]. These concerns, while heightened in such
designs, also apply here. Moving forward, intelligent comparative
study design will be key to evaluating the relative strengths of
different psychedelics for therapy.
In conclusion, this 7T rsfMRI study demonstrates that 2C-B
induces signiﬁcant multivariate disruptions in the brain’s spatiotemporal organisation, expanding our understanding of classic
psychedelics. A direct within-subject fMRI comparison of two
5-HT2A agonists, our ﬁndings show secondary pharmacodynamics
may actively shape psychedelic effects and highlight new
ventures for psychedelic drug development.
DATA AVAILABILITY
Code used for analysis and derivatives will be made available at the following link:
(https://github.com/PabloMallaroni/project_cb_rsfmri). Data and accompanying covariates can be made available upon request to J.G.R and a data use agreement
executed with Maastricht University.

REFERENCES
1. Daws RE, Timmermann C, Giribaldi B, Sexton JD, Wall MB, Erritzoe D, et al.
Increased global integration in the brain after psilocybin therapy for depression.
Nat Med. 2022;28:844–51.

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

2. Deco G, Sanz Perl Y, Johnson S, Bourke N, Carhart-Harris RL, Kringelbach ML.
Different hierarchical reconﬁgurations in the brain by psilocybin and escitalopram for depression. Nat Ment Health. 2024;2:1096–110.
3. Linguiti S, Vogel JW, Sydnor VJ, Pines A, Wellman N, Basbaum A, et al. Functional
imaging studies of acute administration of classic psychedelics, ketamine, and
MDMA: Methodological limitations and convergent results. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev. 2023;154:105421.
4. Girn M, Rosas FE, Daws RE, Gallen CL, Gazzaley A, Carhart-Harris RL. A complex
systems perspective on psychedelic brain action. Trends Cogn Sci.
2023;27:433–45.
5. Kwan AC, Olson DE, Preller KH, Roth BL. The neural basis of psychedelic action.
Nat Neurosci. 2022;25:1407–19.
6. Wall MB, Harding R, Zafar R, Rabiner EA, Nutt DJ, Erritzoe D. Neuroimaging in
psychedelic drug development: past, present, and future. Mol Psychiatry.
2023;28:3573–80.
7. McClure-Begley TD, Roth BL. The promises and perils of psychedelic pharmacology for psychiatry. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2022;21:463–73.
8. E-Wen McCulloch D, Liechti ME, Kuypers KPC, Nutt D, Lundberg J, Stenbæk DS,
et al. Knowledge gaps in psychedelic medicalisation: Clinical studies and regulatory aspects. Neurosci Appl. 2024;3:103938.
9. Mallaroni P, Mason NL, Vinckenbosch FRJ, Ramaekers JG. The use patterns of
novel psychedelics: experiential ﬁngerprints of substituted phenethylamines,
tryptamines and lysergamides. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2022;239:1783–96.
10. Sessa B, Fischer FM. Underground MDMA-, LSD- and 2-CB-assisted individual
and group psychotherapy in Zurich: Outcomes, implications and commentary.
Drug Sci Policy Law. 2015;2:2050324515578080.
11. Doss MK, Mallaroni P, Mason NL, Ramaekers JG. Psilocybin and 2C-B at encoding
distort episodic familiarity. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging.
2024;9:1048–57.
12. Mallaroni P, Mason NL, Reckweg JT, Paci R, Ritscher S, Toennes SW, et al.
Assessment of the acute effects of 2C-B vs. psilocybin on subjective experience,
mood, and cognition. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2023;114:423–33.
13. Marcher-Rørsted E, Halberstadt AL, Klein AK, Chatha M, Jademyr S, Jensen AA,
Kristensen JL. Investigation of the 2, 5-dimethoxy motif in phenethylamine
serotonin 2A receptor agonists. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2020;11:1238–44.
14. Rickli A, Moning OD, Hoener MC, Liechti ME. Receptor interaction proﬁles of
novel psychoactive tryptamines compared with classic hallucinogens. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016;26:1327–37.
15. Rickli A, Luethi D, Reinisch J, Buchy D, Hoener MC, Liechti ME. Receptor interaction proﬁles of novel N-2-methoxybenzyl (NBOMe) derivatives of 2,5-dimethoxy-substituted phenethylamines (2C drugs). Neuropharmacology.
2015;99:546–53.
16. Ray TS. Psychedelics and the human receptorome. PLoS ONE. 2010;5:e9019.
17. Zwartsen A, Verboven AHA, van Kleef RGDM, Wijnolts FMJ, Westerink RHS,
Hondebrink L. Measuring inhibition of monoamine reuptake transporters by
new psychoactive substances (NPS) in real-time using a high-throughput,
ﬂuorescence-based assay. Toxicol In Vitro. 2017;45:60–71.
18. Liechti ME, Baumann C, Gamma A, Vollenweider FX. Acute psychological effects
of 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, “Ecstasy”) are attenuated by
the serotonin uptake inhibitor citalopram. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2000;22:513–21.
19. Becker AM, Holze F, Grandinetti T, Klaiber A, Toedtli VE, Kolaczynska KE, et al.
Acute effects of psilocybin after escitalopram or placebo pretreatment in a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study in healthy subjects. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2022;111:886–95.
20. Robbins TW, Arnsten A. The neuropsychopharmacology of fronto-executive
function: monoaminergic modulation. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2009;32:267–87.
21. Avery MC, Krichmar JL. Neuromodulatory systems and their interactions: a
review of models, theories, and experiments. Front Neural Circuits. 2017;11:108.
22. Shine JM, Aburn MJ, Breakspear M, Poldrack RA. The modulation of neural gain
facilitates a transition between functional segregation and integration in the
brain. eLife. 2018;7:e31130.
23. Shine JM, Breakspear M, Bell PT, Ehgoetz Martens KA, Shine R, Koyejo O, et al.
Human cognition involves the dynamic integration of neural activity and neuromodulatory systems. Nat Neurosci. 2019;22:289–96.
24. Deco G, Cruzat J, Cabral J, Knudsen GM, Carhart-Harris RL, Whybrow PC, et al.
Whole-Brain multimodal neuroimaging model using serotonin receptor maps
explains non-linear functional effects of LSD. Curr Biol. 2018;28:3065–74.e6.
25. Singleton SP, Luppi AI, Carhart-Harris RL, Cruzat J, Roseman L, Nutt DJ, et al.
Receptor-informed network control theory links LSD and psilocybin to a ﬂattening of the brain’s control energy landscape. Nat Commun. 2022;13:5812.
26. Singleton SP, Timmermann C, Luppi AI, Eckernäs E, Roseman L, CarhartHarris RL, et al. Network control energy reductions under DMT relate to serotonin receptors, signal diversity, and subjective experience. Commun Biol.
2025;8:631.

P. Mallaroni et al.

3306
27. Pokorny T, Preller KH, Kraehenmann R, Vollenweider FX. Modulatory effect of
the 5-HT1A agonist buspirone and the mixed non-hallucinogenic 5-HT1A/2A
agonist ergotamine on psilocybin-induced psychedelic experience. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016;26:756–66.
28. Ballentine G, Friedman SF, Bzdok D. Trips and neurotransmitters: Discovering
principled patterns across 6850 hallucinogenic experiences. Sci Adv.
2022;8:eabl6989.
29. Luppi AI, Hansen JY, Adapa R, Carhart-Harris RL, Roseman L, Timmermann C,
et al. In vivo mapping of pharmacologically induced functional
reorganization onto the human brain’s neurotransmitter landscape. Sci Adv.
2023;9:eadf8332.
30. McCulloch DEW, Knudsen GM, Barrett FS, Doss MK, Carhart-Harris RL, Rosas FE,
et al. Psychedelic resting-state neuroimaging: A review and perspective on
balancing replication and novel analyses. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.
2022;138:104689.
31. McCulloch DE-W, Olsen AS, Ozenne B, Stenbæk DS, Armand S, Madsen MK, et al.
Navigating the chaos of psychedelic neuroimaging: A multi-metric evaluation of
acute psilocybin effects on brain entropy. medRxiv :2023.07.03.23292164 [Preprint]. 2023 https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.07.03.23292164v2.
32. Diaz BA, Van Der Sluis S, Moens S, Benjamins JS, Migliorati F, Stoffers D, et al. The
Amsterdam Resting-State Questionnaire reveals multiple phenotypes of restingstate cognition. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013;7:446.
33. Studerus E, Gamma A, Vollenweider FX. Psychometric evaluation of the altered
states of consciousness rating scale (OAV). PLoS ONE. 2010;5:e12412.
34. Nour MM, Evans L, Nutt D, Carhart-Harris RL. Ego-dissolution and psychedelics:
validation of the ego-dissolution inventory (EDI). Front Hum Neurosci.
2016;10:269.
35. Shannon BJ, Dosenbach RA, Su Y, Vlassenko AG, Larson-Prior LJ, Nolan TS, et al.
Morning-evening variation in human brain metabolism and memory circuits. J
Neurophysiol. 2013;109:1444–56.
36. Esteban O, Markiewicz CJ, Blair RW, Moodie CA, Isik AI, Erramuzpe A, et al.
fMRIPrep: a robust preprocessing pipeline for functional MRI. Nat Methods.
2019;16:111–6.
37. Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli S, Nieto-Castanon A. Conn: a functional connectivity toolbox
for correlated and anticorrelated brain networks. Brain Connect. 2012;2:125–41.
38. Behzadi Y, Restom K, Liau J, Liu TT. A component based noise correction
method (CompCor) for BOLD and perfusion based fMRI. Neuroimage.
2007;37:90–101.
39. Murphy K, Fox MD. Towards a consensus regarding global signal regression for
resting state functional connectivity MRI. Neuroimage. 2017;154:169–73.
40. Schaefer A, Kong R, Gordon EM, Laumann TO, Zuo XN, Holmes AJ, et al. LocalGlobal parcellation of the human cerebral cortex from intrinsic functional
connectivity MRI. Cereb Cortex. 2018;28:3095–114.
41. Tian Y, Margulies DS, Breakspear M, Zalesky A. Topographic organization of the
human subcortex unveiled with functional connectivity gradients. Nat Neurosci.
2020;23:1421–32.
42. Yeo BT, Krienen FM, Sepulcre J, Sabuncu MR, Lashkari D, Hollinshead M, et al.
The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional
connectivity. J Neurophysiol. 2011;106:1125–65.
43. Timmermann C, Roseman L, Haridas S, Rosas FE, Luan L, Kettner H, et al. Human
brain effects of DMT assessed via EEG-fMRI. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
2023;120:e2218949120.
44. Avram M, Fortea L, Wollner L, Coenen R, Korda A, Rogg H, et al. Large-scale brain
connectivity changes following the administration of lysergic acid diethylamide,
d-amphetamine, and 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine. Mol Psychiatry.
2024;30:1297–307.
45. Lindquist MA, Xu Y, Nebel MB, Caffo BS. Evaluating dynamic bivariate correlations in resting-state fMRI: a comparison study and a new approach. Neuroimage. 2014;101:531–46.
46. Choe AS, Nebel MB, Barber AD, Cohen JR, Xu Y, Pekar JJ, et al. Comparing testretest reliability of dynamic functional connectivity methods. Neuroimage.
2017;158:155–75.
47. Doss MK, Považan M, Rosenberg MD, Sepeda ND, Davis AK, Finan PH, et al.
Psilocybin therapy increases cognitive and neural ﬂexibility in patients with
major depressive disorder. Transl Psychiatry. 2021;11:574.
48. Doss MK, May DG, Johnson MW, Clifton JM, Hedrick SL, Prisinzano TE, et al. The
acute effects of the atypical dissociative hallucinogen salvinorin a on functional
connectivity in the human brain. Sci Rep. 2020;10:16392.
49. Barrett FS, Doss MK, Sepeda ND, Pekar JJ, Grifﬁths RR. Emotions and brain
function are altered up to one month after a single high dose of psilocybin. Sci
Rep. 2020;10:2214.
50. Delgado-Bonal A, Marshak A. Approximate entropy and sample entropy: A
comprehensive tutorial. Entropy. 2019;21:541.
51. Van de Bittner GC, Ricq EL, Hooker JM. A philosophy for CNS radiotracer design.
Acc Chem Res. 2014;47:3127–34.

52. Hansen JY, Shaﬁei G, Markello RD, Smart K, Cox SML, Nørgaard M, et al. Mapping
neurotransmitter systems to the structural and functional organization of the
human neocortex. Nat Neurosci. 2022;25:1569–81.
53. Wagner HH, Dray S. Generating spatially constrained null models for irregularly
spaced data using Moran spectral randomization methods. Methods Ecol Evol.
2015;6:1169–78.
54. Markello RD, Misic B. Comparing spatial null models for brain maps. Neuroimage. 2021;236:118052.
55. Bazinet V, Hansen JY, Misic B. Towards a biologically annotated brain connectome. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2023;24:747–60.
56. Shaﬁei G, Markello RD, Vos de Wael R, Bernhardt BC, Fulcher BD, Misic B.
Topographic gradients of intrinsic dynamics across neocortex. eLife.
2020;9:e62116.
57. McIntosh AR, Lobaugh NJ. Partial least squares analysis of neuroimaging data:
applications and advances. Neuroimage. 2004;23:S250–63. Suppl 1
58. Zalesky A, Fornito A, Bullmore ET. Network-based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks. Neuroimage. 2010;53:1197–207.
59. Margulies DS, Ghosh SS, Goulas A, Falkiewicz M, Huntenburg JM, Langs G, et al.
Situating the default-mode network along a principal gradient of macroscale
cortical organization. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2016;113:12574–9.
60. Sydnor VJ, Larsen B, Bassett DS, Alexander-Bloch A, Fair DA, Liston C, et al.
Neurodevelopment of the association cortices: Patterns, mechanisms, and
implications for psychopathology. Neuron. 2021;109:2820–46.
61. Carhart-Harris RL, Muthukumaraswamy S, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Droog W,
Murphy K, et al. Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by multimodal
neuroimaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016;113:4853–8.
62. Madsen MK, Fisher PM, Burmester D, Dyssegaard A, Stenbæk DS, Kristiansen S,
et al. Psychedelic effects of psilocybin correlate with serotonin 2A receptor
occupancy and plasma psilocin levels. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2019;44:1328–34.
63. Mason NL, Kuypers KPC, Müller F, Reckweg J, Tse DHY, Toennes SW, et al. Me,
myself, bye: regional alterations in glutamate and the experience of ego dissolution with psilocybin. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2020;45:2003–11.
64. Müller F, Holze F, Dolder P, Ley L, Vizeli P, Soltermann A, et al. MDMA-induced
changes in within-network connectivity contradict the speciﬁcity of these
alterations for the effects of serotonergic hallucinogens. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2021;46:545–53.
65. Siegel JS, Subramanian S, Perry D, Kay BP, Gordon EM, Laumann TO, et al.
Psilocybin desynchronizes the human brain. Nature. 2024;632:131–8.
66. Olsen AS, Lykkebo-Valløe A, Ozenne B, Madsen MK, Stenbæk DS, Armand S,
et al. Psilocybin modulation of time-varying functional connectivity is associated
with plasma psilocin and subjective effects. Neuroimage. 2022;264:119716.
67. Girn M, Roseman L, Bernhardt B, Smallwood J, Carhart-Harris R, Nathan Spreng
R. Serotonergic psychedelic drugs LSD and psilocybin reduce the hierarchical
differentiation of unimodal and transmodal cortex. Neuroimage.
2022;256:119220.
68. Roseman L, Leech R, Feilding A, Nutt DJ, Carhart-Harris RL. The effects of psilocybin and MDMA on between-network resting state functional connectivity in
healthy volunteers. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014;8:204.
69. Shine JM, Lewis LD, Garrett DD, Hwang K. The impact of the human thalamus on
brain-wide information processing. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2023;24:416–30.
70. Kernbach JM, Yeo BTT, Smallwood J, Margulies DS, Thiebaut de Schotten M,
Walter H, et al. Subspecialization within default mode nodes characterized in
10,000 UK Biobank participants. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2018;115:12295–300.
71. Schaefer A, Burmann I, Regenthal R, Arélin K, Barth C, Pampel A, et al. Serotonergic modulation of intrinsic functional connectivity. Curr Biol.
2014;24:2314–8.
72. Tagliazucchi E, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Orban C, Muthukumaraswamy SD, Murphy
K, et al. Increased global functional connectivity correlates with LSD-Induced
ego dissolution. Curr Biol. 2016;26:1043–50.
73. Preller KH, Duerler P, Burt JB, Ji JL, Adkinson B, Stämpﬂi P, et al. Psilocybin
induces time-dependent changes in global functional connectivity. Biol Psychiatry. 2020;88:197–207.
74. Preller KH, Burt JB, Ji JL, Schleifer CH, Adkinson BD, Stämpﬂi P, et al. Changes in
global and thalamic brain connectivity in LSD-induced altered states of consciousness are attributable to the 5-HT2A receptor. eLife. 2018;7:e35082.
75. Lord L-D, Expert P, Atasoy S, Roseman L, Rapuano K, Lambiotte R, et al. Dynamical exploration of the repertoire of brain networks at rest is modulated by
psilocybin. Neuroimage. 2019;199:127–42.
76. Mortaheb S, Fort LD, Mason NL, Mallaroni P, Ramaekers JG, Demertzi A. Dynamic
functional hyperconnectivity after psilocybin intake is primarily associated with
oceanic boundlessness. Biol Psychiatry: Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging.
2024;9:681–92.
77. Carhart-Harris RL, Friston KJ. REBUS and the anarchic brain: Toward a uniﬁed
model of the brain action of psychedelics. Pharmacol Rev. 2019;71:316–44.

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

P. Mallaroni et al.

3307
78. Vollenweider FX, Preller KH. Psychedelic drugs: neurobiology and potential for
treatment of psychiatric disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2020;21:611–24.
79. Mediano PAM, Ikkala A, Kievit RA, Jagannathan SR, Varley TF, Stamatakis EA,
et al. Fluctuations in Neural Complexity During Wakefulness Relate To Conscious
Level and Cognition. bioRxiv: 2021.09.23.461002 [Preprint] 2021 https://
www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.09.23.461002v1.
80. Ort A, Smallridge JW, Sarasso S, Casarotto S, von Rotz R, Casanova A, et al. TMSEEG and resting-state EEG applied to altered states of consciousness: oscillations, complexity, and phenomenology. iScience. 2023;26:106589.
81. Mediano PAM, Rosas FE, Timmermann C, Roseman L, Nutt DJ, Feilding A, et al.
Effects of external stimulation on psychedelic state neurodynamics. ACS Chem
Neurosci. 2024;15:462–71.
82. Leiser SC, Li Y, Pehrson AL, Dale E, Smagin G, Sanchez C. Serotonergic regulation
of prefrontal cortical circuitries involved in cognitive processing: a review of
individual 5-HT receptor mechanisms and concerted effects of 5-HT receptors
exempliﬁed by the multimodal antidepressant vortioxetine. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2015;6:970–86.
83. Juliani A, Chelu V, Graesser L, Safron A A dual-receptor model of serotonergic
psychedelics: therapeutic insights from simulated cortical dynamics. bioRxiv:
2024.04.12.589282 [Preprint] 2024 https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/
2024.04.12.589282v1.
84. Tiger M, Varnäs K, Okubo Y, Lundberg J. The 5-HT(1B) receptor - a potential
target
for
antidepressant
treatment.
Psychopharmacology
(Berl).
2018;235:1317–34.
85. Svensson JE, Tiger M, Plavén-Sigray P, Halldin C, Schain M, Lundberg J. In vivo
correlation of serotonin transporter and 1B receptor availability in the human
brain: a PET study. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2022;47:1863–8.
86. Varnäs K, Hall H, Bonaventure P, Sedvall G. Autoradiographic mapping of 5-HT1B
and 5-HT1D receptors in the post mortem human brain using [3H]GR 125743.
Brain Res. 2001;915:47–57.
87. Montañez S, Munn JL, Owens WA, Horton RE, Daws LC. 5-HT1B receptor modulation of the serotonin transporter in vivo: studies using KO mice. Neurochem
Int. 2014;73:127–31.
88. Páleníček T, Fujáková M, Brunovský M, Horáček J, Gorman I, Balíková M, et al.
Behavioral, neurochemical and pharmaco-EEG proﬁles of the psychedelic drug
4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine (2C-B) in rats. Psychopharmacology
(Berl). 2013;225:75–93.
89. Palamar JJ, Acosta P. A qualitative descriptive analysis of effects of psychedelic
phenethylamines and tryptamines. Hum Psychopharmacol: Clinical and
Experimental. 2020;35:e2719.
90. Sayalı C, Barrett FS. The costs and beneﬁts of psychedelics on cognition and
mood. Neuron. 2023;111:614–30.
91. Menon V. Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: a unifying triple
network model. Trends Cogn Sci. 2011;15:483–506.
92. Valk SL, Xu T, Paquola C, Park B-y, Bethlehem RA, Vos de Wael R, et al. Genetic
and phylogenetic uncoupling of structure and function in human transmodal
cortex. Nat Commun. 2022;13:2341.
93. Mallaroni P, Mason NL, Kloft L, Reckweg JT, van Oorsouw K, Toennes SW, et al.
Shared functional connectome ﬁngerprints following ritualistic ayahuasca
intake. Neuroimage. 2024;285:120480.
94. Tolle HM, Farah JC, Mallaroni P, Mason NL, Ramaekers JG, Amico E. The unique
neural signature of your trip: Functional connectome ﬁngerprints of subjective
psilocybin experience. Netw Neurosci. 2024;8:203–25.
95. Luppi AI, Singleton SP, Hansen JY, Jamison KW, Bzdok D, Kuceyeski A, et al.
Contributions of network structure, chemoarchitecture and diagnostic categories to transitions between cognitive topographies. Nat Biomed Eng.
2024;8:1142–61.
96. Escrichs A, Sanz Perl Y, Fisher PM, Martínez-Molina N, G-Guzman E, Frokjaer VG,
et al. Whole-brain turbulent dynamics predict responsiveness to pharmacological treatment in major depressive disorder. Mol Psychiatry 2024;30:1069–79.
97. Doss MK, Samaha J, Barrett FS, Grifﬁths RR, de Wit H, Gallo DA, Koen JD. Unique
effects of sedatives, dissociatives, psychedelics, stimulants, and cannabinoids on
episodic memory: A review and reanalysis of acute drug effects on recollection,
familiarity, and metamemory. Psychol Rev. 2024;131:523–62.
98. Ettrup A, Hansen M, Santini MA, Paine J, Gillings N, Palner M, et al. Radiosynthesis and in vivo evaluation of a series of substituted 11 C-phenethylamines
as 5-HT 2A agonist PET tracers. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2011;38:681–93.

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3295 – 3307

99. Fisher PM, Larsen K, Plavén-Sigray P, Knudsen GM, Ozenne B Pitfalls of mapping
functional and molecular human brain imaging data from separate cohorts.
bioRxiv: 2025.04.22.650037 [Preprint]. 2025 https://www.biorxiv.org/content/
10.1101/2025.04.22.650037v1.
100. Knudsen GM. Sustained effects of single doses of classical psychedelics in
humans. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2023;48:145–50.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Manoj K. Doss for discussions pertaining to DCC interpretation, Drummond E.
McCulloch for the implementation, maintenance of and feedback on the COPBET
toolbox, Emma de Brabander for assistance in data collection, Enrico Amico for advice
on statistical approaches. We thank our volunteers for participating in our study.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualisation - P.M; Investigation - P.M, N.L.M, J.G.R; Project Administration - P.M,
N.L.M, J.G.R; Formal analysis - P.M; Methodology - P.M, S.P.S; Software - P.M, S.PS;
Validation - S.P.S; Writing – Original Draft, P.M, Writing – Review & Editing; P.M, S.P.S,
N.L.M, T.D.S, J.G.R.; Visualization - P.M; Funding Acquisition - J.G.R; Supervision - J.G.R,
N.L.M.

FUNDING
J.G.R acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the Dutch Research Council (NWO, grant
number 406.18. GO.019).

COMPETING INTERESTS
J.G.R is a scientiﬁc consultant to GH Research who have no involvement in the
preparation or conception of this manuscript or related data. All other authors have
no relevant conﬂicts of interest to declare.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-026-03447-0.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Pablo Mallaroni.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed
the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in
this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2026

