Molecular Psychiatry

www.nature.com/mp

PERSPECTIVE

OPEN

The many-to-many problem of endophenotypes in psychiatry a biological perspective
Juergen Dukart

1,2 ✉

, Leon D. Lotter

1,2,3

, Casey Paquola1,2, Simon B. Eickhoff1,2 and Leonhard Schilbach

4,5

© The Author(s) 2026

1234567890();,:

While modern diagnostic classiﬁcation systems aim to nosologically structure psychiatric disorders, they poorly align with the genetic,
neurobiological, and environmental heterogeneity observed in these disorders. This limitation has complicated the search for clinically
useful biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment. Recent work on genetic and environmental contributions to mental health indicates
that this heterogeneity stems from differential involvement of diverse biological pathways within and across diagnostic clusters. This
complex interplay presents a many-to-many mapping problem in psychiatry, where distinct pathophysiological processes can lead to
similar clinical symptoms. Here, we argue that disentangling these biological mechanisms requires development of process-speciﬁc
biomarkers that could replace non-speciﬁc neuroimaging markers widely used in neuropsychiatric research. We further propose a
framework for biomarker research that adopts a biologically informed perspective integrating the interactions between genes and the
environment to address this problem. Such a multidimensional framework holds promise for developing biology-driven models of
psychiatric disorders, enabling treatment strategies tailored to individual pathophysiology.
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3416–3424; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-026-03473-y

INTRODUCTION
About two decades ago, Andreas Meyer-Lindenberg and Daniel
Weinberger published their seminal work on the potential of
neuroimaging measures as endophenotypes across psychiatric
disorders [1]. These endophenotypes are supposed to represent
identiﬁable brain circuits whose structural or functional properties
are modiﬁed by risk genes associated with respective psychiatric
conditions. Pathophysiological expressions of the endophenotype
would then relate to observable clinical symptoms and could be
used as a diagnostic or treatment response biomarker. Despite
extensive research efforts in this direction, there are still no clinically
established biomarkers for any psychiatric disorder. Whilst grouplevel neuroimaging and other biomarker alterations are repeatedly
reported, the effect sizes tend to be small and of limited
generalizability across different cohorts. Both limit their usability
for clinical applications. Here we ﬁrst discuss the current diagnostic
and classiﬁcation concepts in psychiatry and outline their limitations. We propose a novel framework for deﬁning a multidimensional vulnerability search grid, mapping symptom-related
biological pathways shaped by individual genetic and environmental factors. This grid can be interrogated using pathway-speciﬁc
biomarkers to capture the manifestation of individual pathophysiology, offering a route toward personalized interventions.
DIAGNOSTIC CATEGORIES, SYMPTOM DIMENSIONS AND
THEIR LIMITATIONS
The standard diagnostic approaches in psychiatry, including
DSM-5 and ICD-10 classiﬁcations, rely on the assignment of

patients to distinct diagnostic categories based on their observed
constellations of symptoms [2, 3]. Following this logic, two
patients with limited overlap in their symptom proﬁles may be
placed into the same diagnostic category, because they each
present with a speciﬁc number of symptoms out of a longer list.
Whilst this diagnostic categorization approaches for mental
disorders are biologically agnostic, then agnosticism is arguably
primarily a reﬂection of the lack of validated biomarkers that
would allow for a reliable biology driven classiﬁcation. This
argument is underscored by the recurrent reclassiﬁcation of
disorders - such as anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis and Wilson’s
disease - from psychiatry to neurology following the identiﬁcation
of reliable biomarkers. [4, 5].
In light of this, concerns have been repeatedly raised regarding
the validity of many of the psychiatric diagnoses [6]. Lacking
objective biomarkers not only for diagnosis, but also for treatment
selection, treatment optimization is often based on trial and error
with a substantial proportion of patients failing to respond to
available treatments [7]. This heterogeneity of symptom constellations and treatment responses is difﬁcult to address in the current
diagnostic setting [8]. Different efforts, such as the Hierarchical
Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP) approach, have aimed to
advance the classiﬁcation of psychopathology and maximize its
usefulness for research and clinical practice by revising the current
diagnostic framework into empirically derived syndromes [9]. Yet,
such approaches suffer under the same assumptions as older
symptom-based categorizations, in that (i) such clinical categories
exist and (ii) the manifestation of a similar symptom occurs due to
convergent pathophysiological mechanisms which may be caused

1

Institute of Neurosciences and Medicine, Brain & Behaviour (INM-7), Research Centre Juelich, Juelich, Germany. 2Institute of Systems Neuroscience, Medical Faculty, Heinrich
Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany. 3Max Planck School of Cognition, Leipzig, Germany. 4Department of General Psychiatry 2, LVR-Klinikum Duesseldorf, Bergische Landstraße
2, 40629 Duesseldorf, Germany. 5Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.
✉email: j.dukart@fz-juelich.de

Received: 1 September 2025 Revised: 22 December 2025 Accepted: 30 January 2026
Published online: 9 February 2026

J. Dukart et al.

by the same or distinct etiologies. The ﬁrst assumption is essential
for the meaningful development of diagnostic biomarkers, while
the second is critical for effective interventions. If the ﬁrst
assumption does not hold, identifying a common biomarker for
a speciﬁc diagnosis becomes futile. Likewise, a standardized
treatment is unlikely to be effective for two patients exhibiting the
same symptom, but driven by non-convergent pathophysiological
mechanisms. Later, we discuss why both assumptions are unlikely
to hold from genetic and environmental perspectives.
An alternative dimension-based approach is adopted by the socalled Research Domain Criteria (RDoC). RDoC aims to study
mental disorders based on their underlying neurobiological
mechanisms by integrating genetics, neuroscience and behavioral
science [10]. The focus is hereby on understanding the neural
circuitry underlying speciﬁc cognitive and symptom domains to
identify biomarkers and viable treatment targets. Beside the
explicit assumptions, it assumes implicitly that brain-behavior
relationships are tractable and mappable (i.e. at region or circuit
level) to speciﬁc clinical constructs such as acute fear or social
communication. A dysfunction of such a construct is then
responsible for manifestation of a speciﬁc clinical symptom
dimension, irrespective of the actual diagnostic category.
The categorical approaches carry the advantage of parsing the
psychiatric population into distinct clinically manageable subpopulations allowing for treatment optimization along these limited
number of categories. The dimensional approaches aim for
dissection of the observed symptom space into a limited number
of symptom dimensions that could be more easily linked to
neurobiological mechanisms, thereby allowing for targeted optimization of the treatment along these dimensions. Despite these
advantages, both approaches are limited by the validity of their
underlying assumptions as both do not account for the possibility of
the many-to-many mapping problem in psychiatric disorders. More
speciﬁcally, due to the highly multidimensional interactions of
cellular and molecular mechanisms in the polyneurotransmitter
landscape of the brain, the same symptom or even the same cluster
of symptoms could be subserved by distinct mechanisms. Major
evidence supporting this notion comes from lesion mapping
studies often demonstrating limited to no overlap between lesions
inducing similar neurological or psychiatric symptoms [11, 12].
This issue is further complicated by the use of rather unspeciﬁc
biomarkers in most clinical studies in psychiatry. Take for example,
the notion of an excitation inhibition (E/I) imbalance, which is
frequently discussed in the context of autism and other psychiatric
and neurological disorders [13]. In the most basic form, a presumed
E/I imbalance can be achieved through direct excitation or
inhibition of the GABAergic or glutamatergic neurotransmitter
systems, not to mention the effect of different receptor subtypes
and distinct short- and long-range projection mechanisms. Indirect
modulation or compensatory shifts in E/I balance are also possible
through or in response to known interactions with other
neurotransmitter systems [14]. Moreover, functional E/I measures
to date are largely based on modelling of E/I imbalance from
unspeciﬁc imaging modalities such as resting state functional
magnetic resonance imaging or electroencephalography. Both do
not differentiate between different neurotransmitter systems nor
between excitatory, inhibitory or modulatory signals. Modelling of
the E/I ratio based on such measures is therefore inherently limited
by the underlying assumptions reducing the plethora of possible
mechanisms to a single number. Such a manifold of possible
mechanisms leading to the observable outcome of a disturbed E/I
balance combined with the computational limitations illustrates the
limitations of any efforts aiming to map the complexity of
psychiatric disorders with unspeciﬁc biomarkers. This example also
points to the weakness of the assumptions underlying any
categorization approach in psychiatry that is not based on speciﬁc
biological measures. Staying with the example of E/I imbalance, a
lack of biological speciﬁcity, makes it very difﬁcult to assign the
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3416 – 3424

3417
observed alterations to any speciﬁc pathophysiological process. Yet,
such a distinction should most deﬁnitely play a role in the decision
of what should be the primary treatment target. Two patients
displaying similar psychiatric symptoms and E/I alterations would
likely need different intervention strategies depending on if the E/I
imbalance is causally related to their respective symptomatology or
is mere reﬂection of other pathophysiological processes leading to
the actual symptoms.
The E/I imbalance example also highlights the limitations of the
dimensional approach. A neurotransmitter is never alone in a
speciﬁc region or even brain circuit. In fact, most receptors and
transporters across all major neurotransmitter systems display
positive and often even very strong spatial co-localization (Fig. 1A).
For example, the spatial distribution maps for GABAa and the
serotonergic 5-HT2a receptor or the distributions of dopamine
and serotonin transporters share about 80% of variance in each
other’s whole-brain distribution [15] (Fig. 1B). This leads to a
situation in which the disturbance of GABAa and 5-HT2a receptors
in two patients might lead to virtually indistinguishable brain
functional alterations, if measured using an unspeciﬁc imaging
approach. In both the categorical and dimensional approaches,
this similarity would erroneously indicate that both patients
require the same type of treatment despite different pathophysiological mechanisms underlying their clinical symptoms. The
issue becomes even more complicated when considering
plasticity mechanisms, i.e. potential compensatory reorganization of other neurotransmitter systems in response to
disease-inducing pathophysiological alterations [14]. Such secondary effects would appear to be temporally linked to the
observed clinical symptoms without an actual causal relationship.
That such neuroplasticity-based re-organization mechanisms exist
and play a role is clearly demonstrated in stroke recovery studies
where patients are often able to re-learn lost functions despite
strong focalized impairments to speciﬁc brain regions [16].
The above examples illustrate how current categorical and
dimensional approaches may severely underestimate the heterogeneity of the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying psychiatric conditions. Due to the continuous failure to identify
reliable diagnostic biomarkers, recent studies moved towards the
application of unsupervised clustering algorithms to identify
biology-driven subtypes within or across psychiatric diagnoses
[17–19]. However, these efforts do not address but simply move
the problem to a different analysis level as they carry the same
implicit assumptions that such distinct subtypes exist and that
alterations observed in the same brain regions reﬂect the same
pathophysiological mechanism. In the subsequent sections, we
will demonstrate the problems with these assumptions from
genetic, environmental and neuroimaging perspectives
THE GENETIC PERSPECTIVE
The strongest evidence against the above assumptions related to
deﬁnition of distinct biological subtypes comes from genomewide association studies. In the most recent of such studies,
several hundred risk-loci have been reported to be separately
associated with the increased risk of schizophrenia [20], major
depression [21] and other psychiatric disorders [22, 23]. In
addition, cross-diagnostic genome-wide studies reported substantial overlaps in risk loci associated with different psychiatric
conditions [24]. The similarity of these genetic risks appears higher
between psychiatric as compared to neurological disorders [25].
Whilst some of these risk loci have opposite directional effects
being protective for some disorders and increasing risk for others,
most show pleiotropic effects in their directional impact [26].
These disorder speciﬁc and pleiotropic risk loci clearly contribute
to the heritability of psychiatric disorders. More importantly yet,
they converge onto a variety of distinct molecular and cellular
pathways [27].

J. Dukart et al.

3418

Fig. 1 Spatial colocalization across major neurotransmitter systems. A Spatial correlation matrix of different neurotransmitter properties as
derived from the positron emission tomography included in the JuSpace toolbox. B Exemplary visualization of the strong colocalization
observed between GABAa and serotonergic 5-HT2a receptors. Regions with high expression of each receptor and their overlaps are displayed.

The fact that such biological pathways are not mutually
exclusive provides strong evidence for a many-to-many mapping
problem in psychiatry. A person may carry risk alleles converging
on any possible constellation of distinct biological pathways. As an
example, a patient can simultaneously have genetic risks mapping
to postsynaptic dopamine receptors, presynaptic serotonin
reuptake and microglia function. Unless common mechanisms
are identiﬁed that reduce the hundreds of known risk loci into a
limited number of mutually exclusive constellations, any categorization or clustering effort of psychiatric diseases is likely subject
to oversimpliﬁcation. There is no biological reason to assume that
a patient may not have pathophysiological alterations on more
than one biological pathway leading to their clinical condition.
Supporting this notion, different clustering efforts in various
psychiatric populations and integrating different observation
levels ranging from genetics over neuroimaging to clinical
phenotypes resulted in highly heterogeneous ﬁndings ranging
for example from 2 to 5 subtypes for autism [17, 28–31], 2 to
4 subtypes for schizophrenia [19, 32, 33] and 2 to 16 subtypes for
major depression [18, 34, 35]. Whilst these differences may be
partially attributable to deployment of different modalities for
identiﬁcation of the respective subtypes, they nonetheless
illustrate the lack of convergence between genetics, imaging
and clinical ﬁndings. Unless biological exclusiveness of the
subtypes is clearly demonstrated the results of any such
categorization or subtyping approaches are likely to remain futile.
Recognizing this problem, recent studies on polygenic risk
scores (PRS) have started to move away from diagnosis-speciﬁc
PRS towards parsing genetic risks based on their converging
biological pathways. For example, several recent schizophrenia
studies proposed single-ontology PRS that are speciﬁc to
dopaminergic [36] and glutamatergic [37] neurotransmission as
well as cell types including microglia, neurons and astroglia [38]. It
remains to be shown if this proposed differentiation into different
neurotransmitter systems or cell types as the units for the
proposed biological pathways will be sufﬁcient or if a more reﬁned
view, i.e. stratifying the single-ontology PRS into pre- and
postsynaptic neurotransmission or different cell properties, is
warranted. By establishing a closer and more speciﬁc link between
genetics and observed imaging endophenotypes, such genetic
risk parsing carries a lot of promise for dissecting the high
heterogeneity observed in psychiatry [27]. More importantly,

these genetic ﬁndings support a multidimensional view of the
biology underlying the observed psychiatric symptoms. Staying
with the schizophrenia example, a patient can carry an increased
genetic risk on only one or all of the above single-ontology PRS
being associated with their clinical symptoms.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PERSPECTIVE
Environmental risk studies also support the notion of a multidimensional view of psychiatric disorders. For example, dozens of
environmental risk factors are known for schizophrenia alone,
starting from malnutrition and vitamin D deﬁciency in utero and
infancy, to childhood trauma, smoking and substance abuse to
social defeat and certain infections [39]. These risk factors act on
entirely different time scales and through different biological
mechanisms. They are also not speciﬁc to schizophrenia. Similarly
long and often overlapping lists of environmental risk factors have
been reported for most other psychiatric diseases [40, 41].
One way in which environmental risk factors operate is through
epigenetic mechanisms, whereby the respective risks may interact
with weakly acting genetic risk loci mapping to the different
biological pathways. Through these interactions the environmental
risk factors contribute to the individual risk of developing a speciﬁc
psychiatric condition [42]. From a biological perspective, it is
plausible to assume that most of the environmental risk factors
converge in their mechanism of action to the same biological
pathways as the ones deﬁned by the single-ontology PRS. As for
genetic risks, there is also no plausible reason to assume that such
epigenetic interactions are mutually exclusive. A patient may be
equally exposed to only one or all possible combinations of the
known environmental risks. Each of these risks would map on its
respective biological pathway thereby increasing the cumulative risk
of developing speciﬁc clinical symptoms. Yet again, based on the
above arguments, two patients who developed similar symptoms
due to such distinct mechanisms are likely to require different
treatments corresponding to their individual pathophysiology.
MANAGING THE MANY-TO-MANY PROBLEM
It is fully understandable that clinicians desire a simple roadmap
with, ideally, a single biomarker or algorithm for diagnosis and
treatment selection. Yet, mounting evidence suggests that

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3416 – 3424

J. Dukart et al.

3419

Fig. 2 A schematic overview of the proposed vulnerability search grid approach. A A schematic representation of the general symptomspeciﬁc vulnerability search grid as deﬁned by genetic and environmental risk factors. B A schematic representation of the individual
vulnerability search grid as derived from individual genetic and environmental exposure.

psychiatric diseases fall outside of such simpliﬁcations. The highly
multidimensional nature of the known disease-related molecular
and cellular pathways combined with the multidimensional nature
of environmental risk factors leads to a continuum of possible
combinations that can all lead to similar clinical phenotypes.
Ultimately, this problem can and should be approached from
multiple perspectives [43].
Parsing genetic risk scores into speciﬁc molecular and cellular
pathways rather than diagnostic entities is certainly one of the
starting points [27]. It is furthermore important to understand how
a potential pathophysiology in each of these single-ontology
pathways can contribute to the manifestation of speciﬁc clinical
symptoms. Understanding that a speciﬁc person carries the
increased risk for one, two or multiple of these pathophysiological
pathways that can contribute to the observed clinical symptoms
may substantially restrict the possible search space for that
speciﬁc patient. Importantly, this restriction is not exclusive, but
can only serve as a prior, because pathophysiology may also
manifest in pathways without an individually increased genetic
risk. At the same time, it is important to understand how each of
the known environmental risk factors for the observed constellation of symptoms interacts with any of the single-ontology genetic
pathways. For example, the increased risk of schizophrenia due to
vitamin D deﬁciency has been linked to its action on the
regulation of inﬂammatory and immunological processes [44].
Understanding such epigenetic effects would further restrict the
possible search space for determining the individual pathophysiology and facilitate selection of possible interventions.
The intersections of the biological pathways as determined by
possible genetic and environmental risk factors can form a
vulnerability search grid of all possible pathophysiological
mechanisms underlying the manifestation of speciﬁc clinical
symptoms (Fig. 2A). Restricting this search grid to the combinations of genetic and environmental risk factors to which an
individual is or was actually exposed to can then provide a
substantially reduced individual vulnerability grid for generating
hypotheses about the actual mechanisms underlying their
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3416 – 3424

individual symptomatology (Fig. 2B). In this regard, not all
environmental risk factors can be readily mapped onto a speciﬁc
biological pathway. For example, certain complex risks, such as
migration, are likely to exert multidimensional effects via a
combination of biological and subjective psychosocial mechanisms. Two people with the same genetic risk and exposure to the
same environmental risk factor may yield divergent outcomes
depending on their subjective experience of that risk. An identical
situation may be perceived as highly stressful by one individual,
rendering them susceptible to stress-mediated modulation of
dopaminergic transmission, whereas another individual may not
perceive the same situation as stressful at all. Within this model,
neither the common genetic nor the environmental risk factors
are therefore deterministic in their mechanism of action. As
discussed below, these vulnerability pathways can only narrow the
search window for the speciﬁc pathophysiology, creating an
opportunity for pathway-speciﬁc biomarkers to validate its
presence based on probabilities derived from the vulnerability
search grid.
THE POTENTIAL FOR (NEUROIMAGING) BIOMARKERS IN
PSYCHIATRY
A major factor contributing to the, to date, limited usefulness of
neuroimaging measures in psychiatry is, among other, the limited
speciﬁcity of most of the proposed neuroimaging biomarkers.
These limitations start with the classical brain mapping
approaches testing for structural (e.g., cortical thickness) or
functional [e.g., blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD)] alterations
in speciﬁc brain-regions. Whilst somewhat useful for conﬁrming
the presence of a pathophysiological process, these measures are
all extremely unspeciﬁc. Alterations in cortical thickness can be
achieved through changes in myelination, actual neuropathology,
hydration, starvation, physical exercise and many other known
mechanisms. Similarly, alterations in BOLD activity or connectivity
have been previously related to different tasks, states of mind,
changes in the underlying neurotransmission, physical exercise,

J. Dukart et al.

3420
heart rate, breathing, neurostimulation and many other reported
mechanisms. Any observed changes in such measures are
therefore bound to be unspeciﬁc with respect to their interpretation. Any efforts of using these measures to directly derive single
biomarkers, i.e. E/I imbalance or brain age, in the hope to reﬂect
disease-speciﬁc pathophysiological processes are equally bound
to become unspeciﬁc as various mechanisms can result in virtually
indistinguishable perturbations of the respective metrics. To
illustrate this point, E/I imbalance and accelerated brain age have
been reported for every major psychiatric disease rendering them
completely ineffective for differential diagnosis [13, 45].
Any initiatives aiming to change this status quo, therefore, need
to identify biomarkers that are speciﬁc to the respective
psychiatric conditions. Considering the above many-to-many
mapping problem, such measures ideally also need to allow for
individualized and pathology-speciﬁc interpretation of observed
brain alterations.
Ultimately, a holistic multidimensional approach that aims to
measure pathology along the biological pathways, which contribute to the individual clinical symptomatology, should be the
goal for biomarker development (Fig. 3). Ideally, such biomarkers
should be speciﬁc to the biological pathways as derived from the
above vulnerability grid of genetic and environmental factors. This
can be achieved either through development of novel technologies allowing for an improved quantiﬁcation of multimodal
pathophysiology or through improvements in existing technologies by making them more speciﬁc to the relevant biological
pathways.
Examples for the ﬁrst approach are developments of novel
target-speciﬁc tracers in nuclear medicine combined with the
efforts of moving towards multi-tracer mapping approaches, i.e.
through simultaneous administration of several positron emission
tomography (PET) tracers or through combination of PET imaging
with recently emerging deep-learning technologies to generate
synthetic images of different biological properties [46]. Efforts to
advance magnetic resonance spectroscopy towards measuring
whole-brain multi-metabolomic proﬁles fall under this category,
too [47]. All of these approaches strongly rely on overcoming
substantial technical or other hurdles in technology development,
i.e. dealing with increased radioactivity exposure in multi-tracer
PET imaging or hardware limitations in case of whole-brain
magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
At the same time, the second approach of adopting existing
neuroimaging technologies to make them more sensitive to
speciﬁc biological pathways appears more and more promising.
Such efforts include recently proposed co-localization approaches
testing for spatial associations between non-speciﬁc structural,
functional or electrophysiological information with gene expression or nuclear medicine derived whole-brain atlases for speciﬁc
biological pathways [15, 48]. Several research groups demonstrated that such approaches carry the potential for improving
biological speciﬁcity of magnetic resonance imaging derived
outcome measures [49–51]. Other efforts in this direction include
the development of advanced biophysical compartment models
and the adoption of multiparameter mapping acquisition protocols [52, 53].
Until more direct measures become available, adopting such
optimized analysis approaches to readily available structural,
functional and electrophysiological information may provide a
starting point to move neuroimaging towards more speciﬁcity and
more personalized evaluation of the underlying multidimensional
pathophysiology. Importantly, these efforts can and should be
complemented by careful validation of the underlying assumptions and integration of other biomarker modalities such as
development of improved metabolomic panels, pluripotent stem
cells or brain organoids to gain potentially more speciﬁc causal
insights into the individual pathophysiology.

INTEGRATION OF BIOMARKERS, GENETICS AND
ENVIRONMENT
Obtaining neuroimaging or other biomarker ﬁngerprints that are
speciﬁc to the underlying biological pathways carries several
advantages with respect to integration with the above described
vulnerability search grid deﬁned by the combination of genetic
and environmental risk factors (Fig. 4). First of all, such biomarkers
would provide strong subject-speciﬁc evidence for the actual
pathophysiological manifestation in the respective gene-byenvironment biological vulnerability pathway. Moreover, in the
context of the strong positive colocalization of many of the
molecular systems and considering the presence of potential
compensation mechanisms, even a highly speciﬁc biomarker
cannot differentiate between the actual causal and adaptational
effects in the brain. In this regard, combining the evidence from
biomarkers with the vulnerability search grid deﬁned by genes
and environment may substantially facilitate such a discrimination. It is reasonable to assume that, for an individual patient,
alterations in a speciﬁc biological pathway are more likely to be
causally related to their disease manifestation when meeting
speciﬁc criteria. These include being supported by the patient’s
genetic risk, being linked to known environmental exposures, and
having established associations with the observed clinical
manifestation. In contrast, biomarker alterations that lack such
supportive evidence may be less likely to have contributed to the
patient’s condition. Such a step-wise procedure would facilitate
identiﬁcation of the actual causal pathophysiological mechanisms
underlying each patient’s individual clinical condition, reducing
the many-to-many problem to a clinically manageable approach.
An important aspect that is often disregarded in biomarker
research in psychiatry is the differentiation between state and trait
pathophysiology. States are expected to reﬂect disease dynamics,
i.e. the magnitude of clinical symptoms and would be expected to
improve following successful intervention. In contrast, traits would
typically precede disease onset providing evidence of an
increased risk for a speciﬁc clinical condition. In the above
vulnerability search grid, this distinction is important for selection
of appropriate interventions. It is plausible to assume that even
with a strong causal relationship, trait-like pathophysiology that
evolves over decades is unlikely to be easily modiﬁable on the
time scale of typical interventions. Long-term interventions or
aiming for compensation may be the only viable treatment
options here. On the contrary, one may expect quick recovery
when normalizing pathophysiological brain states. Although this
distinction may not always apply, it provides a useful framework
for aligning intervention strategies with the temporal characteristics of the underlying pathology. An integrative view on
biomarkers, genetics and environment is necessary to advance
understanding of these temporal associations.
INTEGRATION WITH CURRENT DIAGNOSTIC FRAMEWORKS
Importantly, an integrative framework that combines evidence
from genetics, environment, and biomarkers does not contradict
the routine diagnostic practices of modern psychiatry. At its core,
this approach is agnostic to existing diagnostic categories, instead
emphasizing the individual, potentially unique, multimodal
pathophysiology underlying observed symptom constellations.
Given the likely limited number of biological pathways contributing to speciﬁc symptoms, this framework anticipates convergence
of certain constellations across patients, thereby enabling more
precise deﬁnitions of psychiatric disorders grounded in biology.
Crucially, however, it also recognizes that most patients may fall
within a multidimensional spectrum characterized by distinct,
coexisting biological pathways. Traditional taxonomies can thus
remain valuable for initial assessment and everyday clinical care,
while treatment strategies must shift from a one-size-ﬁts-all model

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3416 – 3424

J. Dukart et al.

3421

Fig. 3 Overview of the proposed approach integrating symptom-speciﬁc genetic, environmental, and biomarker evidence. The general,
literature-derived vulnerability search grid can be reﬁned based on an individual’s genetic proﬁle and environmental exposures, generating a
personalized vulnerability risk grid. This risk grid can then be interrogated using pathway-speciﬁc biomarkers to detect actual
pathophysiological alterations along these pathways. Based on this biomarker evidence, personalized interventions can be selected to
target the identiﬁed pathophysiological alterations.

to personalized, biology-informed, multidimensional interventions
targeting these patient-speciﬁc mechanisms. In this way, the
proposed integrative approach not only reﬁnes current interventions but also facilitates the discovery of novel therapies, as
illustrated below.
ADVANCING CLINICAL INTERVENTIONS
Despite an increased unmet medical need, drug development in
psychiatry has experienced major setbacks in the past with many
major pharmaceutical companies having withdrawn from such
efforts over the past decades due to limited success in developing
new interventions [54]. Particularly the use of diagnostic
Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3416 – 3424

constructs that are ill-suited or unrelated to the underlying
biological mechanisms has been highlighted as a major contributing factor to the frequent failures of novel interventions in
clinical trials [55]. Considering the many-to-many problem
illustrated above, any inclusion criteria for such clinical trials that
are based on the diagnosis or even speciﬁc symptom dimensions
are bound to result in inclusion of patients with distinct
constellations of biological pathways contributing to their
respective clinical symptoms. In such a scenario, the effect of
any drug with a pre-speciﬁed mechanism of action would be
substantially diluted as the drug would be only effective in a
subpopulation of patients with a matching pathophysiology.
Indeed, such dilution effects have been suggested as a major

J. Dukart et al.

3422

Fig. 4 Schematic representation of the spatial co-localization approach for deriving biological pathway-speciﬁc information from multimodal
neuroimaging.

explanatory mechanism for low effect sizes observed in treatment
trials of depression [56].
Adopting a many-to-many perspective on individual pathophysiology in psychiatric disorders may open novel avenues towards
improved applications of existing and development of novel,
more effective interventions. First of all, it is important to
understand if and how existing interventions act or interact with
each speciﬁc biological pathway. Whilst such relationships are
relatively straightforward for most pharmacological interventions,
other treatment options, such as electroconvulsive therapy,
neurostimulation, psychotherapy or environmental interventions,
would need to be carefully evaluated with respect to their
underlying biological mechanisms of action. Having established
such a mapping of interventions to biological pathways carries
several advantages. Instead of a trial and error approach moving
from ﬁrst line to second or third line of treatment, interventions
could be tailored to individual pathophysiology through a
targeted combination of different interventions aiming to restore
or compensate for the individual multidimensional pathophysiology along the affected biological pathways. Such an approach
may initially appear restrictive for the possibility of conducting
large-scale clinical trials. However, the shift of focus does not
reduce the pool of available patients, but rather opens the
window for cross-diagnostic interventions with potentially larger
effect sizes due to a better match up of interventions with the
underlying pathophysiology. Importantly, the successes and
failures of such intervention trials could help reﬁne the vulnerability search grid by providing evidence for or against a causal

relationship between speciﬁc interventions and biological
pathways.
REFERENCES
1. Meyer-Lindenberg A, Weinberger DR. Intermediate phenotypes and genetic
mechanisms of psychiatric disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006;7:818–27.
2. Association AP, others. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(DSM-5®). American Psychiatric Pub; 2013.
3. Organization WH. ICD-10: international statistical classiﬁcation of diseases and
related health problems: tenth revision. World Health Organization; 2004.
4. Dalmau J, Gleichman AJ, Hughes EG, Rossi JE, Peng X, Lai M, et al. Anti-NMDAreceptor encephalitis: case series and analysis of the effects of antibodies. Lancet
Neurol. 2008;7:1091–8.
5. Ala A, Walker AP, Ashkan K, Dooley JS, Schilsky ML. Wilson’s disease. Lancet.
2007;369:397–408.
6. Jablensky A. Psychiatric classiﬁcations: validity and utility. World Psychiatry.
2016;15:26–31.
7. Howes OD, Thase ME, Pillinger T. Treatment resistance in psychiatry: state of the
art and new directions. Mol Psychiatry. 2022;27:58–72.
8. Borsboom D, Cramer AOJ. Network analysis: an integrative approach to the
structure of psychopathology. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2013;9:91–121.
9. Kotov R, Krueger RF, Watson D, Achenbach TM, Althoff RR, Bagby RM, et al. The
hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology (HiTOP): a dimensional alternative to
traditional nosologies. J Abnorm Psychol. 2017;126:454–77.
10. Insel T, Cuthbert B, Garvey M, Heinssen R, Pine DS, Quinn K, et al. Research
domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classiﬁcation framework for research on
mental disorders. AJP. 2010;167:748–51.
11. Boes AD, Prasad S, Liu H, Liu Q, Pascual-Leone A, Caviness VS Jr, et al. Network
localization of neurological symptoms from focal brain lesions. Brain.
2015;138:3061–75.

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3416 – 3424

J. Dukart et al.

3423
12. Trapp NT, Bruss JE, Manzel K, Grafman J, Tranel D, Boes AD. Large-scale lesion
symptom mapping of depression identiﬁes brain regions for risk and resilience.
Brain. 2023;146:1672–85.
13. Sohal VS, Rubenstein JLR. Excitation-inhibition balance as a framework for
investigating mechanisms in neuropsychiatric disorders. Mol Psychiatry.
2019;24:1248–57.
14. Guiard BP, El Mansari M, Merali Z, Blier P. Functional interactions between
dopamine, serotonin and norepinephrine neurons: an in-vivo electrophysiological study in rats with monoaminergic lesions. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008;11:625–39.
15. Dukart J, Holiga S, Rullmann M, Lanzenberger R, Hawkins PCT, Mehta MA, et al.
JuSpace: A tool for spatial correlation analyses of magnetic resonance imaging
data with nuclear imaging derived neurotransmitter maps. Hum Brain Mapp.
2020;42:555–66.
16. Murphy TH, Corbett D. Plasticity during stroke recovery: from synapse to behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009;10:861–72.
17. Liu G, Shi L, Qiu J, Lu W. Two neuroanatomical subtypes of males with autism
spectrum disorder revealed using semi-supervised machine learning. Mol Autism.
2022;13:9.
18. Nguyen T-D, Harder A, Xiong Y, Kowalec K, Hägg S, Cai N, et al. Genetic heterogeneity and subtypes of major depression. Mol Psychiatry. 2022;27:1667–75.
19. Geisler D, Walton E, Naylor M, Roessner V, Lim KO, Charles Schulz S, et al. Brain
structure and function correlates of cognitive subtypes in schizophrenia. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging. 2015;234:74–83.
20. Trubetskoy V, Pardiñas AF, Qi T, Panagiotaropoulou G, Awasthi S, Bigdeli TB, et al.
Mapping genomic loci implicates genes and synaptic biology in schizophrenia.
Nature. 2022;604:502–8.
21. Meng X, Navoly G, Giannakopoulou O, Levey DF, Koller D, Pathak GA, et al. Multiancestry genome-wide association study of major depression aids locus discovery, ﬁne mapping, gene prioritization and causal inference. Nat Genet.
2024;56:222–33.
22. Li H-J, Zhang C, Hui L, Zhou D-S, Li Y, Zhang C-Y, et al. Novel risk loci associated
with genetic risk for bipolar disorder among han chinese individuals: a genomewide association study and meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry. 2021;78:320–30.
23. Zhou X, Feliciano P, Shu C, Wang T, Astrovskaya I, Hall JB, et al. Integrating de
novo and inherited variants in 42,607 autism cases identiﬁes mutations in new
moderate-risk genes. Nat Genet. 2022;54:1305–19.
24. Consortium C-DG of the PG. Identiﬁcation of risk loci with shared effects on ﬁve
major psychiatric disorders: a genome-wide analysis. The Lancet.
2013;381:1371–9.
25. Brainstorm Consortium, Anttila V, Bulik-Sullivan B, Finucane HK, Walters RK, Bras J,
et al. Analysis of shared heritability in common disorders of the brain. Science.
2018;360:eaap8757.
26. Lee PH, Anttila V, Won H, Feng Y-CA, Rosenthal J, Zhu Z, et al. Genomic relationships, novel loci, and pleiotropic mechanisms across eight psychiatric disorders. Cell. 2019;179:1469.e11
27. Pergola G, Penzel N, Sportelli L, Bertolino A. Lessons learned from parsing genetic
risk for schizophrenia into biological pathways. Biol Psychiatry. 2023;94:121–30.
28. Easson AK, Fatima Z, McIntosh AR. Functional connectivity-based subtypes of
individuals with and without autism spectrum disorder. Network Neuroscience.
2019;3:344–62.
29. Uljarević M, Phillips JM, Schuck RK, Schapp S, Solomon EM, Salzman E, et al.
Exploring social subtypes in autism spectrum disorder: a preliminary study.
Autism Research. 2020;13:1335–42.
30. Hong S-J, Vogelstein JT, Gozzi A, Bernhardt BC, Yeo BTT, Milham MP, et al. Toward
neurosubtypes in autism. Biol Psychiatry. 2020;88:111–28.
31. Hong S-J, Valk SL, Di Martino A, Milham MP, Bernhardt BC. Multidimensional
neuroanatomical subtyping of autism spectrum disorder. Cereb Cortex.
2018;28:3578–88.
32. Xiao Y, Liao W, Long Z, Tao B, Zhao Q, Luo C, et al. Subtyping schizophrenia
patients based on patterns of structural brain alterations. Schizophr Bull.
2022;48:241–50.
33. Lubeiro A, Rueda C, Hernández JA, Sanz J, Sarramea F, Molina V. Identiﬁcation of
two clusters within schizophrenia with different structural, functional and clinical
characteristics. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry.
2016;64:79–86.
34. Liang S, Wang Q, Kong X, Deng W, Yang X, Li X, et al. White matter abnormalities
in major depression biotypes identiﬁed by diffusion tensor imaging. Neurosci
Bull. 2019;35:867–76.
35. Wang Y, Tang S, Zhang L, Bu X, Lu L, Li H, et al. Data-driven clustering differentiates subtypes of major depressive disorder with distinct brain connectivity
and symptom features. Br J Psychiatry. 2021;219:606–13.

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3416 – 3424

36. Wang C, Liu B, Zhang X, Cui Y, Yu C, Jiang T. Multilocus genetic proﬁle in
dopaminergic pathway modulates the striatum and working memory. Sci Rep.
2018;8:5372.
37. Rampino A, Taurisano P, Fanelli G, Attrotto M, Torretta S, Antonucci LA, et al. A
polygenic risk score of glutamatergic SNPs associated with schizophrenia predicts attentional behavior and related brain activity in healthy humans. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2017;27:928–39.
38. Corley E, Holleran L, Fahey L, Corvin A, Morris DW, Donohoe G. Microglialexpressed genetic risk variants, cognitive function and brain volume in patients
with schizophrenia and healthy controls. Transl Psychiatry. 2021;11:490.
39. Davis J, Eyre H, Jacka FN, Dodd S, Dean O, McEwen S, et al. A review of vulnerability and risks for schizophrenia: beyond the two hit hypothesis. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev. 2016;65:185–94.
40. Alloy LB, Abramson LY, Urosevic S, Walshaw PD, Nusslock R, Neeren AM. The
psychosocial context of bipolar disorder: Environmental, cognitive, and developmental risk factors. Clin Psychol Rev. 2005;25:1043–75.
41. van den Bosch M, Meyer-Lindenberg A. Environmental exposures and depression: biological mechanisms and epidemiological evidence. Annu Rev Public
Health. 2019;40:239–59.
42. Föcking M, Doyle B, Munawar N, Dillon ET, Cotter D, Cagney G. Epigenetic factors
in schizophrenia: mechanisms and experimental approaches. Mol Neuropsychiatry. 2019;5:6–12.
43. Kendler K. Levels of explanation in psychiatric and substance use disorders:
implications for the development of an etiologically based nosology. Mol Psychiatry. 2012;17:11–21.
44. Chiang M, Natarajan R, Fan X. Vitamin D in schizophrenia: a clinical review. BMJ
Ment Health. 2016;19:6–9.
45. Ballester PL, Romano MT, de Azevedo Cardoso T, Hassel S, Strother SC, Kennedy
SH, et al. Brain age in mood and psychotic disorders: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2022;145:42–55.
46. Wardak M, Hooper SM, Schiepers C, Chen W, Aparici CM, Davidzon GA, et al.
Multi-tracer PET imaging using deep learning: applications in patients with highgrade gliomas. In: Rekik I, Adeli E, Park SH, Cintas C, editors. Predictive Intelligence in Medicine, Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland; 2022. p. 24–35.
47. Klietz M, Mahmoudi N, Maudsley AA, Sheriff S, Bronzlik P, Almohammad M, et al.
Whole-brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy reveals distinct alterations in
neurometabolic proﬁle in progressive supranuclear palsy. Mov Disord.
2023;38:1503–14.
48. Shen EH, Overly CC, Jones AR. The allen human brain atlas: comprehensive gene
expression mapping of the human brain. Trends Neurosci. 2012;35:711–4.
49. Hansen JY, Shaﬁei G, Markello RD, Smart K, Cox SM, Nørgaard M, et al. Mapping
neurotransmitter systems to the structural and functional organization of the
human neocortex. Nat Neurosci. 2022;25:1569–81.
50. Lotter LD, Saberi A, Hansen JY, Misic B, Paquola C, Barker GJ, et al. Regional
patterns of human cortex development correlate with underlying neurobiology.
Nat Commun. 2024;15:7987.
51. Kasper J, Eickhoff SB, Caspers S, Peter J, Dogan I, Wolf RC, et al. Local synchronicity in dopamine-rich caudate nucleus inﬂuences Huntington’s disease motor
phenotype. Brain. 2023;146:3319–30.
52. Kunz N, Zhang H, Vasung L, O’Brien KR, Assaf Y, Lazeyras F, et al. Assessing white
matter microstructure of the newborn with multi-shell diffusion MRI and biophysical compartment models. Neuroimage. 2014;96:288–99.
53. Weiskopf N, Suckling J, Williams G, Correia MM, Inkster B, Tait R, et al. Quantitative
multi-parameter mapping of R1, PD*, MT, and R2* at 3T: a multi-center validation.
Front Neurosci. 2013;7:95.
54. Hyman SE. Psychiatric drug development: diagnosing a crisis. Cerebrum.
2013;2013:5.
55. Papassotiropoulos A, de Quervain DJ-F. Failed drug discovery in psychiatry: time
for human genome-guided solutions. Trends Cogn Sci. 2015;19:183–7.
56. Hieronymus F, Jauhar S, Østergaard SD, Young AH. One (effect) size does not ﬁt
at all: Interpreting clinical signiﬁcance and effect sizes in depression treatment
trials. J Psychopharmacol. 2020;34:1074–8.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
JD, LDL and SBE received support from DFG (DU 2027/7-1 project number
549186835).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JD wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed and critically revised the manuscript.

J. Dukart et al.

3424
FUNDING

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Juergen Dukart.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

© The Author(s) 2026

Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

Molecular Psychiatry (2026) 31:3416 – 3424

