Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

Computational whole-body-exposome
models for global precision brain health
Received: 9 May 2025
Accepted: 14 November 2025

1234567890():,;

1234567890():,;

Check for updates

Agustín Ibáñez 1,2,3,4,5 , Claudia Duran-Aniotz1, Joaquín Migeot1,2,
Sandra Báez 1,6, Sol Fittipaldi 1,2,7, Carlos Coronel-Oliveros1,2,
Harris A. Eyre8,9,10,11, Chinedu Udeh-Momoh9,12,13, Henrik Zetterberg 14,15,16,17,
Suvarna Alladi18, Carmen Sandi 19, Ian H. Robertson2,20, Sanne Franzen 21,
Temitope Farombi2,22, Janitza L. Montalvo Ortiz 23, Sudha Seshadri 24,
Felipe Court25,26,27,28, Pedro Valdes-Sosa 29,30, Jiayuan Xu 31,32,
Chunshui Yu31,32, Lea Grinberg9,33,34,35,36, Brian Lawlor2, Perminder S. Sachdev37,
Kristine Yaffe34,35, Vladimir Hachinski38, Karl Friston 39, Enzo Tagliazucchi1,40 &
Hernando Santamaría-García 9,41,42

The worldwide rise of neurological and psychiatric conditions poses major
challenges. However, current global research remains fragmented, dominated
by limited cohorts and poorly integrated datasets that disconnect whole-body
health, exposome, and brain health. Theories rarely unify brain measures with
extracerebral factors or capture heterogeneity in individual trajectories. We
introduce multimodal diversity, a non-linear, non-simplistic causal and ecological construct integrating data representation, whole-body and exposomic
factors, and computational modeling to address this situated, embedded, and
embodied complexity. This heuristic metamodel integrates global, multilevel
data into personalized predictions fostering population inclusion, multimodal
integration, diagnostic precision, and equitable, context-sensitive advances in
brain health.

The global prevalence of neurological, neurodevelopmental, neurodegenerative, and psychiatric disorders has risen signiﬁcantly1–3. Epidemiological, social, and economic estimates suggest that these diseases
pose signiﬁcant burdens and ﬁnancial costs, impacting human health
and societal welfare1,4. Together, they heighten the risk of comorbidity,
chronic systemic diseases and mortality3. Brain disorders remain
among the top ten leading causes of disability worldwide5,6. Neurological conditions were the most prevalent of the leading causes of disability in 2021, accounting for 443 million disability-adjusted life years
(DALYs)1,5,6. The number of people living with dementia is projected to
rise from 57.4 million in 2019 to 152.8 million by 2050, with the highest
increase anticipated in low- and middle-income countries7. DALYs due
to Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Alzheimer’s disease and related
dementias (ADRD) worldwide increased from 9.66 million to 25.28
million between 1990 and 20191. Psychiatric conditions accounted for
125.3 million DALYs4 in 2019. Between 1990 and 2019, DALYs rates for

A full list of afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper.

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

psychiatric conditions in adults increased from 803.8 to 833.2 per
100,0008. These stark estimates have spurred international calls to
advance brain health through enhanced research, public health initiatives, policy development, targeted interventions, and improved
treatments. The scientiﬁc ﬁelds require more diverse, complex, multilevel, accurate, global, robust, and multimodal approaches7,9–13.
Multimodal diversity in brain health12 (Box 1, Fig. 1) refers here to a
multilevel construct that combines three dimensions (Table 1): (i) data
representation, encompassing heterogeneous sources ranging from
omics to neuroimaging, behavioral, and clinical indicators; (ii) multilevel integration of brain and extracerebral inﬂuences, including wholebody health metrics (e.g., cardiometabolic status, immune function,
gut microbiome, interoception) and environmental factors (physical
and social determinants or exposome); and (iii) computational architectures, capable of handling the intrinsic multimodal complexity,
heterogeneity, and probabilistic trajectories inherent to such diverse

e-mail: agustin.ibanez@gbhi.org; hernando.santamaria@gbhi.org

1

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

BOX 1

Multimodal Diversity
Multimodal diversity refers to different layers of precision brain health,
encompassing data representation, multiple modality integration, and
computational approaches. In socio-political terms, diversity often
highlights inclusion across demographic groups (e.g., race, ethnicity,
sex), but here the term extends to heterogeneity in data and methods
across multiple domains12.
Data representation: Refers to the inclusion of data from global
populations (especially those historically underrepresented) in brain
health research. It entails collecting and analyzing information from
diverse regions and cultures, rather than focusing only on high-income
majority cohorts. This approach is crucial not just for ethical representation but for scientiﬁc validity: including underrepresented groups
reveals unique genetic, environmental, and social factors inﬂuencing
brain health that may be missed in homogeneous samples. Embracing
data diversity helps move beyond one-size-ﬁts-all models and enhances global understanding of brain disorders, enabling more effective
and equitable interventions.
Multimodal data integration: It involves combining multiple dimensions of health-related data to capture the full context of brain health.
This includes traditional brain health metrics (e.g., brain imaging and

data. Unlike traditional approaches that consider single modalities or
levels of analysis, multimodal diversity emphasizes synergistic modeling that integrates biological, systemic, and environmental measures
to generate more accurate, and individualized predictions12–16. This
deﬁnition transcends traditional notions of diversity (often conﬁned to
gender, ethnicity, race, or minority status) by focusing on complex
model interactions that exhibit signiﬁcant variation across individuals
and populations due to stochastic and probabilistic dynamics (i.e., the
random but structured processes driving heterogeneous outcomes
across the lifespan16).
Theoretically and methodologically, this concept emphasizes
synergistic computational modeling and integration of multimodal
data10,12–16 in neurology and psychiatry11,17–24. There are urgent calls to
address methodological barriers, global collaboration, and improved
computational models10,15,17,25–31. However, challenges related to
underrepresentation, the reliance on single-level approaches in global
settings (e.g., those limited to a single data type such as genetic variants, or neuroimaging), and the need for theoretical frameworks that
integrate biological, behavioral, and environmental layers must be
addressed jointly12.
This perspective begins by highlighting how the limited funding,
insufﬁcient samples representation, inadequate global data sharing,
and the absence of uniﬁed theoretical frameworks undermines
advancements in brain health. While our framework is focused mainly
on brain health, we use AD/ADRD as an illustrative case, while also
highlighting applications to psychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders. We propose a heuristic framework that emphasizes integrating
global and multimodal data and theoretical models to tackle the core
challenges for computational modeling. We discuss the core ethical,
social, and technical barriers of this initiative. Finally, we outline a
future agenda and recommendations to enhance computational
models, deep phenotyping, neuroecological links, transdisciplinary
collaboration, and inclusive brain health research.

Why multimodal diversity is essential for precision
brain health
Our perspective focuses on some of the main challenges of precision in
brain health driven by funding constraints, methodological hurdles,

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

cognitive assessments) alongside whole-body health indicators (e.g.,
cardiovascular and metabolic markers, omics, interoception) and
exposome factors (cumulative physical and social exposures across
the lifespan). Merging brain data with systemic health and environmental context allows researchers to capture complex interactions
between neural processes, bodily conditions, and external
inﬂuences.
Computational metamodels: Addressing multimodal diversity
requires advanced computational structures. These are metamodels
designed to synthesize and integrate heterogeneous data. Such a
framework should incorporate heterogeneity-robust methods to
accommodate diverse data distributions, ensuring models remain
generalizable across populations. It emphasizes extracerebral modeling and integration, meaning algorithms jointly model brain metrics
alongside extracerebral factors (e.g., environmental exposures, wholebody health measures). Additionally, individual trajectories are
accounted for by longitudinal and dynamic modeling, capturing how a
person’s brain health changes over time under various inﬂuences.
Together, these strategies form an metamodel encoding multimodal
diversity.

and broader scientiﬁc infrastructures. A core barrier is the limited
funding and consequent lack of substantial multimodal data in global
settings. Current research approaches often fail to represent diverse
populations and incorporate various data types32,33, leading to simpliﬁed predictions34,35 and restricted applicability11,36. By constraining the
focus to single data types29,37 and excluding environmental-biology
interactions, approaches can neglect important factors that impact
brain health38–41.
First, limited representation of diverse populations17,18,22,23 leads to a
lack of generalizability24, decreasing the effectiveness of diagnosis and
treatments12,24,25. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and polygenic risk studies are predominantly based on European descent
populations, biasing the identiﬁcation of risk factors36,42–46 and hindering tailored prediction models and treatments29,37. Ancestry diversity affects the understanding of disease prevalence, genetic and
biological mechanisms, and brain phenotypes47. Reduced population
diversity limits speciﬁcity48–51, neglecting complex biological
mechanisms52 and diminishing clinical insights50, risk identiﬁcation53,54,
cognitive evaluations53,55, and neuroimaging characterization56. These
gaps have a negative impact on accurate diagnosis, biomarker development, and successful clinical trials36,49,57,58.
Multiple factors contribute to increased data variability in
underrepresented populations from Latin America, Africa, Middle East
and Asia. These populations often exhibit more signiﬁcant genetic
admixture51,59 than in the U.S. or European populations. Greater multimodal heterogeneity is also evident, particularly in whole-body and
environmental data12,60. Populations in the Global South frequently
experience higher burdens of cardiometabolic conditions61 and show
stronger biological embedding of structural inequalities. Most predictive models are trained on large U.S. and European datasets. These
problems are observed across Global South populations and minorities within countries such as the US62,63. When applied to underrepresented populations with different data distributions, these
models often exhibit poor generalizability and higher misclassiﬁcation
rates34,56,62.
Second, most research in brain health concentrates on isolated
genetic and brain data13,49,64, neglecting the inﬂuence of whole-body
health and multi-omics60,65. Approaches usually focus on single-level
2

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

Na
no
pla
sti
cs
Air
an po
d h llu
ea tio
tw n
av
es

SE
S

Macro

Gr
ee
ns
pa
ce
s

b. Modeling diversity

So
cia
l in
ter
ac
tio
n
Ge
so nd
cia er
l id and
en
tite
s

a. Data diversity

Model theorization and personalization

Data diversity modelling

Be
ha
vio
r

Fu
nc
tio
na
lity

Co
gn
itio
n

Cli
nic
al

Exposome

Ca
rdi
om
et.
H

Me
tab
oli
cs

Pro
teo
mi
cs

Between data types

Tra
ns
cri
pt.

Extracerebral influences

BCC
Low dimensional manifolds

Heterogeneity & individual trajectories

G
ne loba
tw l
ork
s

Re
gio
ns

Ne
uro
tra
ns
m.

Mi
cro
arc
hit
.

Whole-body health

S
ep ocia
ige l
no
mi
cs

Me
thy
lat
ion

Ge
ne
tic
ris
ks

Ge
ne
tic
mu
t.

MBM

Tailored
metamodels

Genetics-epigenetics

Micro

Macro

Within data types
Fig. 1 | Multimodal diversity framework. The ﬁgure illustrates the dimensions of
multimodal diversity, showcasing data diversity (a) and its integration into personalized models through advanced modeling approaches (b). a depicts data diversity with the hierarchical data layers contributing to brain health determinants,
spanning micro- to macro-levels between and within data types. The ﬁrst level
focuses on genetic and epigenetic factors, including genetic risks, mutations, DNA
methylation, and social epigenomics. The second level represents multimodal
brain models (MBM), encompassing brain microarchitecture, neurotransmission,
structures, functions, and global networks. The third level integrates whole-body
biology, combining multi-omics data such as transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and microbiomics with systemic health indicators like cardiometabolic
health. The fourth level incorporates behavioral, cognitive, and clinical data (BCC).

The ﬁfth level includes exposome factors, such as social determinants (e.g.,
socioeconomic status, social interactions, and social identities) and physical
exposures (e.g., green spaces, nanoplastics, air pollution, and heatwaves).
b outlines the diversity in modeling approaches required to effectively integrate
multimodal data diversity into brain health research. It emphasizes data diversity,
the generation of low-dimensional brain representations, the incorporation of
extracerebral inﬂuences such as whole-body health and exposome data, and the
need to account for heterogeneity and individual trajectories. This framework
highlights the potential of multimodal diversity to advance precision medicine by
addressing complex brain health determinants and personalizing interventions.
SES socioeconomic status.

explanations, such as genetics36,42–46 while overlooking biologyenvironment interactions14,15,64 or vice versa. Although some models
(see below) emphasize how the body serves as a dynamic interface
linking the environment and the brain, most existing research remains
predominantly theoretical. The exposome13 refers to the totality of
exposures an individual experiences throughout their lifetime
encompassing physical (e.g., pollutants, heat waves) and social inﬂuences (socioeconomic status, political stress, loneliness, poverty, and
cultural factors). The exposome has only recently begun to be applied
to brain health9,13,58 with few examples combining it with genetics,
whole-body health, and brain function10,66,67. These brain-bodyenvironment interactions require new conceptual models9,68 for data

integration69,70. How to systematically model extracerebral factors is
poorly understood, limiting predictive accuracy69. Models that rely on
averages frequently miss critical individual differences, leading to
inaccurate predictions, especially in diverse populations34. A metamodel may enables a comprehensive understanding of brain health by
integrating biology-environment interactions, and population
heterogeneity15,71, informing global health policies and advancing
precision medicine72,73.
Third, computational modeling often fails to integrate global data
and account for heterogeneity, thereby hampering the development
of tailored diagnostic tools and treatments34,35. The underrepresentation of non-White and diverse populations in global

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

3

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

Table 1 | Challenges and potential solutions for multimodal diversity in precision brain health
Domain

Challenges and limitations

Potential solutions

1. Data representation

- Underrepresentation of global and minority populations in
datasets.
- Bias toward US/European ancestry in genetics, imaging, and
clinical cohorts.
- Reduced generalizability of predictive models due to narrow
population samples.

- Expand and integrate datasets to include diverse
ancestries, socioeconomic backgrounds, and environmental contexts.
- Promote equity-driven data collection strategies, particularly in the Global South.
- Implement deep phenotyping across different populations to capture heterogeneity and unique risk/protective factors.

2. Multimodal integration of extracerebral measures

- Brain health research overly focused on brain-speciﬁc measures, neglecting systemic, exposome, and whole-body interactions.
- Limited frameworks for modeling biology- environment interactions.
- Sparse integration of omics, cardiovascular, metabolic, and
environmental data in brain health models.

- Systematic integration of multimodal data, combining
brain, body, and exposome metrics.
- Leverage organ clocks, multi-omics, and exposome
proﬁling to capture systemic and environmental impacts
on brain health.
- Adopt ecological and One Health perspectives to link
social, environmental, and biological domains in brain
health.

3. Computational and theoretical
structures supporting diversity

- Existing models mainly based on low-dimensional, singledomain data.
- Poor adaptability to heterogeneity and individual variability.
- Lack of temporal integration between brain dynamics, extracerebral inﬂuences, and environmental exposures in predictive modeling.

- Develop multimodal metamodels combining:
(i) spatiotemporal dimensionality reduction to generate
low-dimensional latent representations of brain-bodyexposome dynamics;
(ii) biophysical whole-brain generative models to integrate
multimodal biological measures;
(iii) embodied models linking extracerebral (organ, exposome) states to brain dynamics; and
(iv) Digital twins and probabilistic frameworks to model
heterogeneous individual trajectories across the
lifespan.

datasets compromises the generalizability, fairness, and clinical utility
of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine learning models56,74,75. Models
trained on demographically skewed data risk misclassiﬁcation, poor
prediction, and reinforcement of systemic inequities. Equitable modeling requires transparent reporting (clear documentation of data
sources, methods, and limitations), interdisciplinary validation (crossﬁeld review and replication of ﬁndings), and stakeholder engagement
(involving community and policy representatives)76. Key needs include
assessing data heterogeneity, incorporating multimodal inputs (i.e.,
systemic biology and exposomic layers9,28,77) and applying individualized probabilistic modeling to capture complex risk trajectories73.
These strategies are essential for advancing truly equitable, globally
relevant brain health research. A structured metamodel -a computational framework designed to handle data heterogeneity, integrate
multimodal sources, and model individual trajectories and extracerebral inﬂuences-, is crucial for advancing brain health research29.

Multimodal diversity frameworks in data
and models
We present the building blocks of a heuristic framework incorporating
synergistic computational architectures10–16,53,77–83 and personalized
models72,73,84. We ﬁrst summarize emerging evidence on multimodal
diversity. Then, we explore how integrating computational approaches
can provide promising pathways for improved theorization and
prediction.

Emerging evidence in brain health and disease
Evolving evidence and calls from the World Health Organization (WHO),
the Alzheimer’s Association, and the National Institute on Aging highlight the importance of incorporating population diversity, loneliness,
social determinants of health, and complex biological, neuropathological, and exposomic measures in brain health research36. Research
requires addressing infrastructural, methodological, and funding barriers that hinder the development of diverse, biologically and contextually informed datasets. Despite advances from initiatives like UK
Biobank85 and FINNGEN86, these datasets face challenges regarding
population
heterogeneity,
rich
ancestries,
and
global

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

representation39,87,88. Bridging these gaps demands global collaboration
to build inclusive, multilevel, lifespan-oriented cohorts. Key priorities
include lifespan enrollment89–92 and the development of biorepositories
to reduce disparities in genomic and biomarker data74,93–96.
Funding agencies supporting large-scale initiatives have started to
promote increased data diversity and multimodal integration and
comparisons across global datasets are now more feasible. Examples
include the NIH All of Us program (with 77% of participants having
underrepresented backgrounds), UK Biobank; the Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI) – European Union; the Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI, NIH, USA); the NIH - Brain Research Through Advancing
Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) Initiative (USA); the NIH Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) Initiative (USA), the NIH ECHO program, as well as programs in the Global South10,26–29,31,62,97–103. Initiatives
such as H3Africa104, FINGER105, BrainLat96,106 and ReDLat107 demonstrate
that ethically governed, context-sensitive infrastructures are feasible in
the Global South, though broader implementation is needed. These
programs evidence feasible, collaborative pathways supporting largescale inclusion across populations. Sustained progress will require
coordinated international efforts, culturally grounded design, regional
leadership, and structural reforms (federated data sharing, openaccess platforms, and long-term ethical governance) to ensure equity
and generate actionable insights for global brain health.

Genetic diversity and scientiﬁc discovery
The number of well-powered, large-scale genetic studies using GWAS
and polygenic risk scores worldwide, particularly in the Global South,
for psychiatric (i.e., schizophrenia108, bipolar109 or depression110), and
neurological conditions (i.e., Parkinson’s disease111 and stroke112) is
small but growing. Over 40 new genetic risk variants not previously
reported in European populations have been identiﬁed. These ﬁndings
can potentially generate discriminative models across different
ancestries. Distinct linkage disequilibrium and haplotype patterns in
Global South populations sharpen ﬁne-mapping and causal inference.
Polygenic risk scores (PRS) trained mainly on European datasets
underscore the need for ancestry-aware discovery and validation113.
Local-ancestry–aware methods such as Tractor enable robust GWAS in

4

Perspective
admixed populations, producing ancestry-speciﬁc effect estimates
and recent schizophrenia GWAS across African, Latino, and East Asian
cohorts conﬁrm their value114. Large, multi-ancestry cohorts such as
NeuroGAP-Psychosis in Africa and the Latin American Genomics
Consortium are examples of this effort115,116. Asian GWAS have also
identiﬁed new pleiotropic loci for depression and schizophrenia (e.g.,
1q25.2)117, while large East Asian–European meta-analyses revealed 53
novel schizophrenia loci through trans-ancestry ﬁne-mapping118. Rare
CNV variants for major psychiatric disorders119 and speciﬁc genetic
footprints associated with stroke120 have also been reported in Chinese
populations.

AD/ADRD
Speciﬁc mutations not previously reported in Europe and the US,
include the PSEN1 E280A mutation (the Paisa mutation), found in
Medellin, Colombia, and responsible for the largest early-onset AD
population in the world. The high prevalence of the PSEN1 E280A
mutation in the Colombian population stems from a founder event,
with ancestral origins predominantly traced to Spanish lineage121–123.
APOE effects on AD/ADRD vary by haplotype and local ancestry in the
Global South. Protective variants such as APOE ε3 Christchurch124 and
RELN125, identiﬁed in LAC, renew genetics-informed trial prospects51. In
African-ancestry cohorts, meta-analyses identiﬁed MPDZ and 11 additional AD-risk loci126 and showed attenuated APOE ε4 risk compared
with Europeans43. APOE ε2 is generally more protective in Europeans
than in other ancestries, while the ε2/ε3 genotype confers ~8-fold
higher AD risk in African Americans yet reduced risk in Europeans127.
These ﬁndings stress the need for diverse cohorts to expand discovery
and enable ancestry-informed therapies.

Whole-body health
Whole-body health offers a systemic framework to elucidate how
physiological networks across the cardiometabolic, inﬂammatory, and
immune domains mediate the brain’s adaptation to environmental
demands11–13,60,64,128–133. This approach allows to embed exposomic
perturbations within multi-organ and multi-omics architectures to
provide a mechanistic bridge linking external exposures to neurobiological trajectories of resilience and disease13,16. Multi-omics has
emerged as a promising path in psychiatry65 and neurology41,65,134,135.
Combining omics with clinical, neuropathological, and neuroimaging
data improves greater prediction accuracy41,65,136,137. Inﬂammation
processes have become relevant in psychiatry, neurology138, and
neurodegeneration129,134,136,139. Pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, including
mediators such as Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-6, and the nucleotidebinding and oligomerization domain like receptor (NLR) family, are
critical for synaptic dysfunction and allostatic load in brain
disorders140. Corticosteroids and sex hormones (testosterone and
estradiol) play crucial roles in modulating neurodevelopment, brain
structure, and function141; and their dysfunction is associated with
multiple conditions141.
Proteome-wide analyses of brain tissue and peripheral ﬂuids have
identiﬁed proteins and pathways linked to conditions such as schizophrenia and other mental disorders142. Integrating proteomic QTLs,
transcriptomic QTLs, and GWAS signals enables prioritization of candidate genes beyond what genomics alone can achieve142. Proteomewide association studies, Mendelian randomization, and imaging
phenotypes have linked proteins such as EGFR and TMEM106B to both
brain structure and risk for schizophrenia or neurodevelopmental
disorders143. Transcriptomics–MRI integration further shows how gene
expression aligns with structural and functional changes in mental
illness144, while multimodal fusion uncovers hidden pathophysiological
links145. Spatial multi-omics and mass spectrometry-based neuroproteomics has provided detailed maps of protein-level changes (posttranslational modiﬁcations and protein–protein interactions) which
are central to the pathogenesis of diseases146,147.

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

AD/ADRD
The AT(N) (A=amyloid-beta, T=tau, and N=neurodegeneration) framework reﬂects AD brain changes but most likely is insufﬁcient for
accurate diagnosis in global settings47,148–150. Combining this framework with multi-omics and neuroimaging can enhance
predictions145,151, clinical characterization152 and the discovery of treatment targets152. RNA sequencing and proteomic screening evidence
upregulation of transcription- and chromatin-related genes, including
histone acetyltransferases for H3K27ac and H3K9ac153. One study154
identiﬁed 137 proteins with distinct trajectories in causative models of
AD, including many that changed before traditional AD biomarkers.
GWAS have identiﬁed AD-susceptible genes involved in amyloid plaque and neuroﬁbrillary tangle formation, cholesterol metabolism,
endocytosis, and the innate immune system155. AD/ADRD loci impact
immune mechanisms in AD155. Among other multi-omics markers136,137,
metabolomics has revealed brain insulin dysfunction. Transcriptomics
reveal a signiﬁcant impact of ancestry, particularly affecting immune
pathways156. Postmortem brain multi-omics data and in vivo samples
are very limited. Biophysical and semi-empirical modeling can help to
incorporate these scarce data via prios36,157,158. Other more accessible
modalities (i.e., plasma proteomics, cell transcriptomics) offer promising non-invasive proxies for brain health41,159,160 and multi-modal
integration41,159,161. Brain-blood correspondence in animal models69,162
can also validate peripheral multi-omics biomarkers.
Epigenomics also evidence the impact of diversity163–165. Ancestral
epigenetic proﬁles demonstrate differential DNA methylation signatures in imprinted gene regulatory zones within the inﬂammasome
(e.g., NLRP1 and MEST/MESTIT1) across individuals with AD166. Early
developmental alterations in DNA methylation may contribute to
ancestry risk166. Differences in DNA methylation age acceleration (e.g.,
epigenetic clocks) have been linked to immune system aging and
inﬂammation, inﬂuenced by environmental and lifestyle factors167.
Organ clocks (the biological age measures and mechanisms within
speciﬁc organs that regulate their function) utilize transcriptome,
epigenome, and proteome to integrate the physiological rhythms and
aging processes of heart, liver, kidneys, gut, and brain168. The combination of genomics, particularly polygenic risk scores, with organ
clocks represents a powerful strategy for predicting mortality indices,
disease pathology, resiliency, and healthy aging16,169. Whole-body
health, including cardiometabolic factors are critical predictors of
brain health and disorders60,61. Gut microbiome health is sensitive to
exposome inﬂuences and is a crucial predictor of brain health66. Cardiovascular, metabolic, and gut microbiome are key predictors of
behavior and clinical outcomes60,170.
Despite these advances, several ﬁelds of omics remain immature
and underdeveloped. Whole-body modeling frameworks that integrate longitudinal multi-omics at the individual level are still in their
infancy, particularly in underrepresented populations. The gut-brain
axis, although promising, lacks standardized protocols and causal
models in human studies. Postmortem brain multi-omics data,
essential for validation, are scarce and geographically skewed, limiting global generalizability. Conversely, promising advances are
emerging from the integration of epigenetic clocks, peripheral omics
(e.g., plasma proteomics), and organ-speciﬁc biological age
measures.

Biology–environment interactions
Understanding biology-environment interactions58,171 requires multimodal frameworks70 capturing the biological embedding of macrosocial factors (e.g., country-level inequality) on biology and brain
health. The One-Health approach emphasizes the interconnectedness
of human, animal, and environmental health and is critical for precision brain health13. Water and air pollution, plastics and nanoplastics,
climate change, and heat waves are essential to the physical
exposome9,13. Social inequality, loneliness, political polarization, and
5

Perspective
injustice are social exposomes9,48 highlighting the need to examine
macro- and individual-level determinants9,13,48,54,172,173.
Environmental exposures strongly inﬂuence brain biology and
increase the risk of psychiatric and neurological disorders. Long-term
air pollution, particularly PM2.5 and NOₓ174 have also been linked to
structural and functional brain alterations, as well as to depression and
other mental disorders, through mechanisms involving inﬂammation,
oxidative stress, and genetic susceptibility175,176. Socioeconomic factors
such as lower family income, parental education, and neighborhood
disadvantage predict reduced cortical surface area and a greater risk of
neurodevelopmental conditions48,177–180. Furthermore, early adversities
have been consistently associated with structural and functional brain
changes and with the development of psychiatric disorders181,182.
External exposomes dysregulate internal biological processes13.
Life adversity, unhealthy lifestyles, and loneliness are associated with
impaired hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activity, reducing
glucocorticoid sensitivity, triggering insulin resistance, and causing
endothelial dysfunction183. These adversities are linked to inﬂammation, elevated peripheral inﬂammatory cytokines184–187, and impacts on
the microbiome, ultimately increasing the risk of non-communicable
diseases, neuropsychiatric and neurological conditions184,186,187. The
prediction of clinical outcomes increases when biological variables are
integrated with exposomes10,29,79,80. Different factors, including socioeconomic status, environmental factors, perceived discrimination, and
country-level inequality levels10,67,79,80,173,188 inﬂuence neuroendocrine,
brain-gut microbiome66, and neurocognitive markers10. Social determinants of health48 predict healthy aging better than sex and age in
diverse populations53,188,189.
Social epigenomics163,190,191 combines exposomes and epigenetics.
Social determinants of health, discrimination, exclusion, and socioeconomic adversities inﬂuence DNA methylation191. Epigenome-wide
association studies (EWAS) of socioeconomic status and social mobility have implicated genes involved in inﬂammation, immune function,
stress response, metabolic processes, and neural development. Biological age is inﬂuenced by ancestry, lifestyles, and social
factors190,192,193. Hispanic populations have lower intrinsic epigenetic
age acceleration, indicating slower cellular aging (i.e., the Hispanic
paradox, with slower aging processes despite having increased risk
factors)167,194. Effects of social disparities on epigenetics can also be
mitigated by lifestyle changes in some ethnic groups. Methylomics and
transcriptomics analyses from the human postmortem brain and studies on genetic variation reveal a signiﬁcant impact of genetic ancestry, particularly affecting genes involved in immune response
pathways156.

AD/ADRD
Different exposomes impact the brain structure-functioning48,171,
health53,189, and disease10. Ancestry and social exposome inﬂuence
biomarkers for AD/ADRD195. Hispanic populations have increased
adverse physical and social exposomes and higher AD biomarkers
AT(N) such as Aβ40 and reduced neuroﬁlament plasma levels compared to non-Hispanic White populations in the US196. Cardiometabolic
diseases, unequally distributed worldwide and inﬂuenced by the
internal and social exposomes, modulate AT(N) biomarkers195. Socioeconomic factors affect the relationship between brain markers and
ancestry195. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid Aβ42/40 levels are negatively correlated
with total tau and p-tau181 in Caucasians, but the correlation is weaker
in non-Hispanic Black individuals51. CSF Aβ42/40, total tau, and p-tau181
demonstrate weaker correlations with cognitive measures in Black
than White participants197. Effects of ancestry and social disparity in
AD/ADRD have also been reported in organ194,198, circadian198, and brain
clocks10.
The dependence on proxies is an important limitation, as these
are indirect indicators used when direct measures are unavailable.
Unlike endophenotypes (biologically grounded intermediate traits) or

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

surrogate outcomes (validated substitutes for clinical endpoints),
proxies provide pragmatic but non-causal markers. Although much of
the evidence is not causal, progress in the ﬁeld is already evident1–5. A
hierarchy of exposome factors5–7 can situate biological mechanisms
alongside broader social, economic, and environmental factors. A new
generation of methods is actively tackling this challenge8, including
the NIH Gateway Exposome Coordinating Center, and the predictive
exposome databases9 are bringing multiple innovations. Highresolution exposure assessment10, and evaluations of exposure-wide
association studies (ExWAS) can improve speciﬁcity and
granularity1,10–13. Compared to traditional self-report instruments,
which are prone to recall and response bias, these emerging
biomarker-based tools offer greater accuracy, temporal resolution,
and translational value.

Modeling and theorization
Different computational and theoretical architectures are required to
assess the ﬂexibility and complexity needed to incorporate multimodal diversity (Box 2). Speciﬁc examples include dynamic causal
modeling199, Bayesian architectures200, active inference models201, and
biophysical modeling78. These methods have proven effective in integrating multimodal data while being generative, recursive, and continuously updated as new information becomes available15. Datadriven generative approaches enable the development of singlesubject and personalized translational models65,71,84. This framework
does not support the idea of extensive, universal, or one-size-ﬁts-all
models of brain health. Instead, it advocates for tailored models in
which the relevance of predictors and outcomes varies according to
population-speciﬁc data, contextual variables, and multimodal variation. The metamodel framework requires tailored procedures that can
be instantiated using different techniques (Tables 2 and 3). We propose four main avenues to develop future computational
architectures.

Low-dimensional integration of multilevel brain measures
Multimodal diversity can be mapped to low-level biological mechanisms using methods from artiﬁcial intelligence202 and dynamic systems
modeling15. On the one hand, non-linear deep learning dimensionality
reduction techniques enable the generation of highly informative lowdimensional latent representations of brain spatiotemporal dynamics.
Non-linear low-dimensionality reduction approaches can more accurately characterize different conditions than the traditional statistical
approaches relying on assumptions of linearity and stationarity82,83,203.
Machine learning can be complemented by theory-driven dynamical
system measures, such as metastability (the brain’s ability to transition
between globally integrated and segregated states204), irreversibility
(linked to brain complexity, entropy and ﬂexible brain transitions205),
and criticality (a metric of proximity to a dynamic regime in-between
order and chaos), which have proven effective in capturing and conveying the structural and functional complexity of the brain across
levels in brain disorders205.
Generative biophysical whole-brain models help to investigate
mechanisms underlying data-driven characterizations15. These models
integrate multiple heterogeneous data sources, encompassing brain
structure and function, connectomics, neurochemistry, synaptic processes, or cytoarchitecture206. Moreover, those models can track brain
circuitry integrity and function at multiple spatial and temporal scales
combining fMRI, electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG), or PET, enhancing model predictive power and multilevel consistency206.

Embodied and generative models for extracerebral inﬂuences
Combining different organ clocks with computational architectures
helps to characterize brain health and disorders168,169,198. Accelerated
aging in particular organs, such as the heart, is linked to increased risks
6

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

BOX 2

Main computational concepts
We provide some of the most relevant concepts incorporated in
computational metamodeling.
Low-dimensional data representations: Machine learning techniques
identify lower-dimensional spaces (manifolds) in high-dimensional
data structures289. Mapping data into these manifolds yields lowdimensional latent representations preserving essential features, patterns, or relationships. Manifolds can be identiﬁable linear spaces
using principal component analysis, but more complex methods like
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding detect non-linear manifold structures in high-dimensional spaces. Latent representations
typically reduce dimensionality but also preserve essential
properties15. They maintain the metric structure of the original data,
support generative capacity (mapping latent points back to realistic
data), and allow continuous trajectories aligned with intrinsic or
extrinsic variables (e.g., age, exposomic proﬁles). These features provide a basis for validating that the representation retains relevant
biological and exposome signals.
Generative statistical models: These models learn the mapping from
low-dimensional latent representations to the original space, allowing
the production of information with meaningful statistical properties.
Applied to brain data, models like deep generative autoencoders and
generative adversarial networks can synthesize new observations
without additional experiments.
Whole-brain modeling: Whole-brain activity data can be generated
using a bottom-up approach based on simulating local dynamics of
brain regions coupled by the structural connectome. These dynamics
represent biophysical properties of neural populations, enabling
inference of multi-scale biological mechanisms290 underlying
observed data. Alternatively, phenomenological models aim to
reproduce dynamic behaviors (e.g., oscillatory versus non-oscillatory
patterns)207.

of brain disorders168. For AD, such risk is independent of the bloodbased biomarkers168. The global effects of such extracerebral inﬂuences
can be modeled as descriptors of the global state of the system (order
parameters), capturing and summarizing the nature of dynamic
interactions within the brain15. Order parameters can include wholebody signals, such as autonomic responses, or exposome factors, thus
addressing biology-environmental interactions15,.
From a data-driven approach, the effect of extracerebral inﬂuences on the brain can be determined using low-dimensional latent
representations of spatiotemporal neural dynamics207. A concrete
example are variational autoencoders, generative models combining
deep learning with probabilistic inference, to track low-dimensional
latent representations of multilevel brain states in health and
disease82,203. This approach could be extended to incorporate integrated representations of the brain, bodily states, and exposome,
providing a set of variables simultaneously encoding multiple
dimensions15. These representations can be studied in response to
changes in extracerebral factors, including dietary inputs, physical
activity, stress exposure, and other exposomes9,82.

Incorporating heterogeneity and individual trajectories
Individual and personalized analyses are critical for global healht208.
This requires single-subject data and estimates of how individual’s
biology interacts with heterogeneous environmental factors. In biophysical generative models, country-level heterogeneities can be studied as modulators of parameters linked to neural activity,
metabolism, structural atrophy, and pathological proteins82,206,208.

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

Perturbational approach in modeling: Generative models can
undergo systematic perturbations that are challenging to implement
experimentally. Mapping how neural systems react to these perturbations provides insights into their functionality and stability82. Simulated perturbations can also rehearse personalized treatments by
incorporating data on different neurotransmitter systems to assess
pharmacological interventions.
Individualized trajectory modeling: Probabilistic methods can model
and predict the evolution of individual trajectories over time. Bayesian
inference iteratively combines new observations with prior knowledge,
allowing adaptive learning about hidden states or parameters. Markovian modeling predicts the system’s future based on its current
state, as seen in Markov chains and hidden Markov models.
Dynamic causal modeling (DCM): This approach assesses causal
interactions in response to experimental manipulations from brain
activity recordings. The method ﬁts differential equations with varying
levels of biological detail to time series at regions of interest to
determine the strength and directionality of interactions. Bayesian
model comparison assesses models according to the evidence provided by the generative dynamical system.
Active inference: This framework explains how agents—biological or
artiﬁcial—interact with their environment by minimizing “free energy,”
a measure of prediction error201. This approach uniﬁes perception,
action, and learning within a single probabilistic model. Active inference models incorporate allostatic interoception, where the brain
anticipates and regulates bodily states and related cognitive
processes128 to respond to environmental demands in health and
disease129–131.

Examples are found in the BigBrain project209, integrating tissue
models and neuroanatomical individual data across scales and providing microstructural maps enriched with cellular and molecular
levels merged with fMRI connectivity models, as well as simulations of
diverse brain disorders. Other initiatives provide personalized
transcriptomic210, proteomic211, and neurochemical maps212 to enrich
biophysical generative models.
Perturbational approaches can be used for personalized
medicine15, where the effect of changing variables (perturbations) on
the observed phenotype can be systematically mapped213. This
approach can also be used as a data augmentation technique to
enhance deep learning frameworks, generating synthetic data that
incorporates the characteristics of underrepresented groups,
improving sensitivity and generalizability214. Another way to increase
personalization is by Bayesian models, which provide a probabilistic
framework that continuously updates predictions as individual data
becomes available. This adaptability is essential for personalized brain
health assessments that have facing scarce and heterogeneous data,
enabling the integration of individual-speciﬁc data into models originally built from large population datasets.
Personalized models and individual trajectories can be complementary. Personalized models integrate prior information (genetic,
clinical, or environmental data) to tailor predictions to individuals.
These models can employ supervised learning and probabilistic frameworks that adapt group-level ﬁndings to individual proﬁles215. In
contrast, models of individual trajectories focus on within-person
changes over time, capturing temporal dynamics like disease
7

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

Table 2 | Guidance on data modalities
Data Modality

Typical measurement methods

Example datasets

Prototypical computational approaches

Genetics

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) via
SNP genotyping arrays; whole-genome or
exome sequencing (next-generation
sequencing)

UK Biobank; 1000 Genomes Project

Polygenic risk score modeling (aggregating
risk variants); gene network and pathway
analysis for variant interpretation; Bayesian
integrative models combining genetic proﬁles with other modalities (for personalized
prediction)

Epigenetics

DNA methylation proﬁling (Illumina methylation
arrays) with epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS); chromatin accessibility assays
(ATAC-seq); histone modiﬁcation mapping
(ChIP-seq)

NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Project; PsychENCODE Consortium (brain epigenomics)

Epigenetic clocks to estimate biological
aging (methylation-based age); EWAS linking
environmental factors (e.g., stress, SES) to
gene regulation changes; integrative multiomics models combining epigenomic,
genomic, and neuroimaging data for disease
prediction.

Omics

High-throughput proteomics (mass spectrometry, multiplex immunoassays); metabolomics
proﬁling (LC–MS, NMR spectroscopy); transcriptomics (RNA sequencing, gene expression
microarrays)

ADNI (multimodal biomarkers in Alzheimer’s);
GTEx (tissue transcriptomes); AMP-AD (multiomic Alzheimer’s cohorts)

Dimensionality reduction and factor analysis
(e.g., PCA, structural Bayesian factor analysis)
to integrate high-dimensional omics; network
and pathway analysis to identify affected
biological pathways; generative models (e.g.,
variational autoencoders) and machine
learning for multi-omic data fusion

Whole-Body
Health

Systemic health (vitals, BMI, blood pressure,
metabolic panels); wearable sensor tracking of
physiology (heart rate, sleep, physical activity);
gut microbiome sequencing (16S rRNA proﬁles)

Framingham Heart Study; UK Biobank

Multi-factor risk scores combining health
biomarkers to predict brain outcomes; multisystem network models linking organ health
metrics to brain aging; generative extracerebral models incorporating whole-body
signals into brain simulations (treating body
indices as inputs to brain models); multiorgan aging clocks (integrating genomic and
proteomic markers of heart, liver, etc.) to
predict neurological disease risk

Brain Health

Multimodal imaging (f/MRI; vascular imaging)
and PET for brain structure/function and molecular imaging; EEG/MEG electrophysiology for
neural activity dynamics; standardized cognitive
test batteries (memory, executive function,
cognitive screening exams)

ABCD Study (pediatric imaging & cognitive
data); EuroLad EEG consortium; ReDLat
Consortium

Connectome and network analysis (graphtheoretical metrics of brain connectivity);
biophysical whole-brain network models
(simulate neural dynamics across regions,
integrating multimodal neural data); dynamic
causal modeling (Bayesian causal inference
of directed brain connectivity); hidden Markov models for brain state transitions or
cognitive decline trajectories; deep learning
for multimodal brain data integration (e.g.,
combining f/MRI, M/EEG, and clinical
features)

Exposome

Surveys and questionnaires capturing lifetime
exposures (e.g., education, diet, stress, socioeconomic status); environmental monitoring
and geospatial data (air pollution levels, climate
metrics, neighborhood characteristics); socioeconomic and psychosocial indices (income,
social networks, inequality)

CHIMGEN (Chinese imaging genetics cohort
with cross-ethnic and cross-geographic data);
ReDLat (Latin American dementia cohort with
socio-environmental diversity); HELIX project
(early-life exposome in birth cohorts): UK Biobank (linked lifestyle and environmental data)

Exposome-wide association studies (scanning multiple exposures for links to health
outcomes, analogous to GWAS); geospatial
and multilevel models mapping environmental factors to brain aging or pathology;
causal inference frameworks (e.g., Bayesian
networks, structural equation modeling) to
disentangle correlated exposures; multimodal integration of exposome with biology
(combining SES, lifestyle, and environmental
data with genetics and neuroimaging for
personalized risk prediction)

progression or treatment response. Techniques such as Bayesian
updating, hidden Markov models, and state-space modeling are
commonly used to estimate these temporal trajectories216,217. Combining both strategies enables more accurate, dynamic, and contextsensitive assessments, advancing individualized approaches throughout the lifespan.
Health and disease are inherently variable and not suited to onesize-ﬁts-all approaches218. Normative modeling generates populationbased reference trajectories, quantiﬁes individual deviations, enabling
detection of atypical patterns in healthy and clinical populations219–222.
Normative modeling uses continuous trait modeling (e.g., brain age
deviation), thresholding to deﬁne clinical signiﬁcance, and hybrid
models222. Hierarchical Bayesian methods and data integration have
enhanced their biological relevance222,223. Lifespan-informed designs
demonstrate how these models improve representativeness and
mechanistic insight220,221. Medical digital twins132 represent a natural

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

evolution of these models, allowing real-time simulation of individualized biological systems. The combination of multimodal data
spanning organ-level dynamics, omics, and exposomic inputs can help
AI-driven digital twins to provide personalized aging clocks of health
and disease.

A metamodeling heuristic framework
Current theoretical explanations do not systematically address the
challenges posed by integrating brain measures with extracerebral
information into individual trajectories15,34. New computational strategies can help to incorporate multimodal diversity in psychiatry224
and neurology185,225. The combination of multimodal data, brainextracerebral integration, and personalized approaches provides
bona ﬁde examples, handling population heterogeneity, multilevel
with
emerging
metrics,
and
neuroecological
links10
77,78,81,82,208,214
.
applications
8

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078
Variable, depends
on the speciﬁc model

Distributed data
requirements

Federated learning (distributed training to keep
privacy)282

Variable, but limited by
high computational cost
High complexity, can
approximate arbitrary nonlinear decision functions

Low, allows
single-subject
modeling

Requires large
multimodal
datasets

Active inference (Generative brainbody models)285

Deep multimodal learning (joint
representation models)286

Low complexity, memoryless
assumption can oversimplify
dynamics, discretization may
lose information

High for highdimensional or poorly
sampled systems

Large amounts of data
needed for rare
transitions

Bayesian sequential Inference
(state-space models)287

Markov chain models (e.g., Markov & hidden Markov models for
spatiotemporal brain
dynamics)288

Simple interpretability, analytically tractable, clear clinical stage modeling

Interpretability in terms of
personalized trajectories

Interpretability

Limited and indirect

Limited empirical application,
abstract constructs require biological mapping.

Causal interpretability of directed
brain connectivity, rigorous Bayesian
model comparison, physiologically
meaningful parameters

Both mechanistic and causal
interpretability

Interpretability

Low computational
demands

High computational
demands for highdimensional systems

Computational cost

High computational
demands for model
training

High computational
demands for parameter
optimization

High computational
demands for parameter
optimization

High computational
demands for model
training

Computational cost

Convergence issues with nonindependent and identically distributed data, limited by the least
resourced sites

Computationally expensive for highdimensional data

High computational demands for
model training

Computational cost

Integration possible,
but not directly built in
the model

Integration possible,
but not directly built in
the model

Multimodal
integration

Prone to modality dominance, limited native
uncertainty estimation

Explicit uncertainty modeling but difﬁcult model
speciﬁcation

Requires strong a priori
model speciﬁcation, sensitive to model speciﬁcation
details

Sensitive to assumptions
about coupling between
neural regions

Sensitive to model initialization

Adaptive updating with new
observations, explicit uncertainty
quantiﬁcation, handles irregular
sampling and noise

Robustness

Captures non-linear crossmodal interactions

Uniﬁes perception, action,
and regulation

Supports multimodal
extensions

Can integrate systemic and
environmental modulators
via priors or order
parameters

Robustness

Enhances representation of diverse
populations, mitigates site-speciﬁc
biases, evolves as new data is
available

Inherently models uncertainty and
robust to heterogeneities

High, when trained with sufﬁcient
data and/or data augmentation

Robustness

Multimodal integration

Variable, depends on
the speciﬁc model

Variable, depends on
the speciﬁc model

Integration possible,
but not directly built in
the model

Multimodal
integration

Description of the dimensions used in the table:
Required data: Reﬂects both the amount and organization of data required to train the models. Ranges from individual datasets of relatively low complexity to large structured and annotated databases spanning thousands of individual participants.
Complexity: The capacity of the model to detect complex and non-linear patterns in the data. While complex models are capable of more powerful generalizations, they are computationally demanding, and parameter optimization is data intensive. A downside of
complex models is their tendency to overﬁt if trained with insufﬁcient data, or when lacking adequate regularization.
Interpretability: The extent of understanding gained by analyzing the models. Interpretable models yield valuable insights concerning the underlying mechanisms driving model predictions and can also inform neurobiological and causal relationships in the data.
Computational cost: Reﬂects the combined amount of processing power and data storage demand required by each technique.
Multimodal integration: The capacity of the model to process inputs combining dissimilar data sources, for instance, different neuroimaging modalities. While some models can trivially integrate data sources when combined in the inputs, others offer more
parsimonious and streamlined integration capabilities.
Robustness: Refers to the capacity of the model to yield meaningful predictions facing noisy, uncertain and/or heterogeneous data, including missing and/or potentially misleading samples. Robust models are also stable against methodological choices, such as
the speciﬁcation of hyper-parameters and prior assumptions, and can be easily adapted to handle new data as it becomes available.

High model complexity

Required data

Technique (example)

Complexity

Variable, but limited by
high computational cost

Low, allows
single-subject
modeling

Dynamic causal modeling (DCM,
neuropharmacological dynamics)284

C. Individual level trajectories

Variable, but limited by
high computational cost

Required data

Low, allows
single-subject
modeling

Technique (example)

Variable, depends on
the speciﬁc model

Supports subject-level
interpretation

Limited and indirect

Interpretability

Whole-brain biophysical modeling
(perturbations and extracerebral
modulation)283

Complexity

Variable, depends
on the speciﬁc model

Requires large samples with
good reference data coverage across diversity axes

Normative modeling (population reference
distributions)98

B. Multimodal integration (brain + extracerebral metrics)

High complexity

Large annotated and
balanced datasets required

Large-Scale deep learning
(accelerated brain age in
large cohorts)10

Complexity

Required data

Technique (example)

A. Data heterogeneity

Table 3 | Key methodological instantiations for the metamodel

Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

9

Perspective
Future models must effectively integrate diverse data sources
while accounting for individual differences and the speciﬁc needs of
diverse populations. While current methods show promise, they
require signiﬁcant enhancements to better capture non-linear interactions and individual variability15. Achieving this will require integrating advanced tools, such as synthetic data generation and
probabilistic modeling. Additionally, balancing simpliﬁcation and
precision is crucial in future developments to avoid oversimplifying
complex interactions while ensuring practical and actionable
outcomes.
There is an overreliance on causal models and explanations of
brain health, especially in neuroscience research226. Causality,
although bolstered by powerful technologies, is fundamentally
limited15. Studying isolated neural components or perturbing circuits
offers causal claims about necessity and sufﬁciency but fails to reveal
the embedded principles that govern behavior, largely due to ecological constraints, brain degeneracy, multiple realizability, and the lack
of a direct mapping between structure and function. Pure causal
models often fall into the mereological fallacy (attributing organismal
or environmental functions to parts like neurons or isolated factors),
overlooking brain health as ecological phenomenon. They lack the
capacity to explain why and how health and disease emerge beyond
mechanical causation. Brain health must move beyond pure causal
manipulation towards a pluralistic approach that prioritizes precise
neurosyndemics as a foundational step15. Understanding this embedded and situated nature through complexity science can help uncover
emergent properties triggered by exotype-endotype interactions9.
Synergistic explanatory frameworks13,172,227–229 better capture the complexity of brain health through integration across levels, enhancing
both explanatory power and translational relevance. Bona ﬁde examples of such integrative models include brain and organ aging
clocks168,169,230, allostatic load131,231–235, and the biological embedding of
adversity236–238.

Dimensional approaches for psychiatry and
neurology
Although our perspective is mainly focused on brain health, multimodal diversity in research supports a neurological and psychiatric
dimensionality. The core heuristics apply equally to psychiatric disorders. Neuropsychiatric genomics continues to be underrepresented
in populations with high genetic admixture, distinct environmental
exposures, and healthcare disparities, limiting equity in precision
psychiatry239,240. GWAS including African and Latino participants have
identiﬁed novel variants for depression, schizophrenia, anxiety, and

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

bipolar disorder—missed in European-only studies116,240. Studies from
the Middle East have uncovered multiple novel gene–phenotype
associations in psychiatric disorders. In autism spectrum disorder
(ASD), numerous novel candidates include GLT8D1, HTATSF1, OR6C65,
ITIH6, and DDX26B in Saudi families241, DPP4, TRHR, and MLF1 in
Lebanese families242, and TRPC4 and SCFD2 in Qatari cohorts243. Copy
number studies in Lebanon further implicated PTDSS1 and AREG as
novel ASD susceptibility loci244. In schizophrenia, Israeli trio and
founder-population studies revealed a burden of rare damaging de
novo mutations245, while Iranian families carrying AGO1 truncating
variants showed a spectrum from autism to schizophrenia246. For
bipolar disorder, Turkish multiplex families yielded novel variants in
TMTC1 and STARD9247. These ﬁndings underscore how Middle Eastern
cohorts are expanding the catalog of rare and novel genetic contributors to psychiatric disease.
Environmental, cultural, and social determinants shape psychiatric conditions14,15,64,177,178. Global exposomic variation, combined with
individual and societal-level risks, has been linked to general
psychopathology248–250. In schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, factors
such as urbanization, gross domestic product per capita, employment,
and air pollution inﬂuence clinical expression251, underscoring the
need for context-sensitive diagnosis and treatment250. Computational
psychiatry has improved classiﬁcation and prediction by integrating
neuroimaging, genetics, behavior, and environmental data252–254.
Investigating dimensional biological and exposome pathways in psychiatry and neurology14,64,255 is critical to advance the ﬁeld. There is a
high prevalence of neurodegenerative conditions among patients with
anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, personality disorders, and stress-related conditions256, with overlapping genetic
causes257, shared omics mechanisms256, and social risks5. Addressing
these shared multifactorial interactions255 requires adopting transdiagnostic, dimensional, and integrative approaches.
Emerging models guided by the BePRECISE consortium20,
emphasize integrating diverse datasets and transparent methodologies
to ensure inclusivity, reproducibility, and actionable outcomes for
psychiatry and neurology. These approaches align with the principles
proposed here, incorporating genetic, biological, and exposome data
to reﬁne predictive models and improve clinical interventions.. In psychiatry, deep phenotyping following BePRECISE guidelines combines
neuroimaging, genetic markers, and environmental exposures to
enable the identiﬁcation of depression subtypes associated with speciﬁc treatment responses47. These dimensional frameworks can help
advance the ﬁelds of psychiatry and neurology and lay the groundwork
for inclusive tackling of the real-world complexity of health and disease.

BOX 3

The prototypical case of Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders
The Alzheimer’s Association has recently deﬁned AD as a biological
entity: people who have biomarker evidence of amyloid-β and tau
proteins in the brain or peripheral ﬂuids according to these criteria
have AD, regardless of their clinical or cognitive condition. This deﬁnition reﬂects a long-standing goal in neurology to ﬁnd a static, single,
universal, and straightforward biomarker and treatment approach for
ADRD, captured in the idea that amyloid protein aggregation is the
primary cause of AD. However, the overfocus on amyloid may have
occurred at the expense of other critical pathophysiological
pathways291 and clinical manifestations148. Therapies aimed at reducing
amyloid- β accumulation have shown a modest impact. A complex
interaction of immune system disturbances, inﬂammatory reactions,
cellular stress, microbiome alterations, and mechanisms related to
allostatic load is observed in ADRD154,185,291,292. Heterogeneities in
exposome48, biomarker proﬁles, genetic variants, proteinopathies, and

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

clinical-cognitive-behavioral proﬁles15 suggest that a one-size-ﬁts-all
strategy may not be effective148. Proteomics studies indicate that
proteins’ trajectories changed before traditional amyloid-β and tau
biomarkers154. Novel research using a more synergetic framework with
genomics, proteomics, and neuroimaging shows promise for disease
prediction and diagnosis139,225. Non-linear interactions between
pathophysiological processes and behavioral changes that address
dynamic frameworks can help advance ADRD research78,81,82,135,151,208.
Allostatic and probabilistic models incorporating multimodal risk elements and interactions are increasingly considered129,185,292. These
models still require further development13,15 and inclusion of underrepresented and more diverse populations10,139. Future studies that
incorporate varied and multimodal data and biology- environment
interactions13,15 are needed.

10

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

a. Diversity in data and models
Epi-Genetics
Polygenic risk

Genetic
causation

Low-dimensional representation

Whole body health
Epigenetic
clocks

Neurocognition

Omics

Cardiometabolic
health

Multimodal brain integration

Exposome

BCC

MBM

Extracerebral measures

Social exposome

Physical exposome

Heterogeneities and individual differences

.5

Data type

Model type

Relevance

b. Multimodal diversity models
Data types

Neuro

Psych

HC

Polygenic risk
Genetic causation

Loneliness

Epigenetic clocks
Cardiometabolic health
Economic hardship

Omics
MBM
BCC

Political instability

Social exposome
Physical exposome

Pollution

Brain health risk level

d. AD as a prototypical implementation

MBM

Gene therapy

Genetic

c. Precision brain health

Christchurch
APOE
R154S

PSEN-1

Multicomponent interventions

Probabilistic

BCC

Conclusions: a future agenda
Recent promising advances in speciﬁc ﬁelds (Box 3) call for a more
comprehensive science of precision brain health. Developing a neurosyndemic framework, incorporating diverse, multimodal models,
and accounting for individual variability are essential to achieving a
meaningful impact in real-world applications. We outline future

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

Exposome

Social interaction

Excercise

Healthy diet

Medical monitoring

strategies to provide more holistic, ecologically valid models that
better reﬂect the complexities of human brain health (Table 1).
Critical steps are required to develop the advanced metamodeling
frameworks (Fig. 2). These must simultaneously combine different
strategies (spatiotemporal modeling via dimensionality reduction,
whole-brain biophysical modeling, deep learning, and probabilistic
11

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3

Fig. 2 | Future frameworks for precision brain health. A framework for multimodal diversity that fosters precision medicine approaches needs to address the
complexity of brain health and disorders while guiding personalized strategies. The
a illustrates the concept of diversity in data and models for brain health, integrating
inputs from epi/genetics (polygenic risk, genetic causation, epigenetic clocks),
whole-body health (cardiometabolic measures, omics), neurocognition (MBM:
multimodal brain measures; and BCC: behavior, cognitive and clinical levels), and
the exposome (social and physical factors). These heterogeneous data streams
converge into different combinations of computational approaches (lower part of
the panel) addressing low-dimensional latent representations, multimodal brain
integration, extracerebral measures, and individual heterogeneity, ultimately
enabling tailored model types that enhance precise brain health. b shows multimodal diversity models integrating social factors (e.g., loneliness, economic
hardship, political inﬂuences, and pollution) with data from genetic risks to
exposome exposures. A nested modeling approach (hierarchical method in which a

simpler model is embedded within a more complex one, allowing reﬁnement
across levels of complexity) supports the differentiation of risk proﬁles in individuals with brain disorders (neurological and psychiatric) and healthy controls (HC).
c exempliﬁes the utility of this framework in brain health, highlighting how integrating multiple biological levels enhances the predictive power of biomarkers,
clinical proﬁles, and neurocognitive data for brain health and disorders.
d illustrates derived precision health applications in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). This
approach accounts for cases with differential genetic and probabilistic (environmental) burdens. Examples of future tailored interventions include gene therapy
for individuals with high genetic burdens (e.g., inspired by the Christchurch protective gene for the PSEN1 mutation) and multicomponent interventions (e.g.,
enhanced social interactions, physical activity, healthy diets, and medical monitoring) tailored for those with probabilistic burdens. Created in BioRender.
Migeot, J. (https://BioRender.com/l00oejq) (brain, body, and organs illustrations).

structures) to effectively incorporate data representation and integration, extracerebral inﬂuences, inherent heterogeneity, and personalized modeling. Model perturbation strategies can be relevant to
gain mechanistic insights15. Future metamodel frameworks should
focus on human behavior and neural activity within real-world environments with more naturalistic and ecologically valid research
paradigms11,258. Wearables, natural speech analysis, virtual reality,
augmented reality, real-time neuroimaging and neurofeedback, citizen
science, and ecological simulations may help better assess
diversity11,258.
Deep phenotyping is essential for precision medicine, especially
when it enables detailed clinical phenotypes (e.g., symptoms, disease
progression) and endophenotypes across the whole body. Future
efforts could lead to new disorder subtypes based on ﬁne-grained
clinical and biological correlates259. These advancements would support the creation of more global and extensive databases, tracking
population representations and clinical subtypes. Developing human
digital twins for brain health132 could integrate deep phenotyping data
with temporal monitoring and prediction. These in silico replicas
would enable scenario testing for future prevention and treatment,
linking multi-organ and multi-omics to public health and clinical
applications.
Research incorporating biological and environmental interactions
requires further granularity. Regional public health strategies can
beneﬁt from integrating individual risk proﬁles and personalized
interventions combining macro (i.e., aggregate-level exposome) and
micro (i.e., individual-level brain health) factors16. Deep phenotyping in
longitudinal cohorts can help to identify individual protective or risk
factors that may inﬂuence broader geographical regions. In contrast,
personalized medicine technologies in health and disease can help to
improve healthcare accessibility, especially for marginalized communities. Implementing convergences between regional and individual
models requires complexity modeling and big data32, while prioritizing
data privacy and equity. Integrating population admixtures and multimodal data is essential for predicting clinical diagnoses characterizing healthy variation, clarifying frequent and infrequent phenotypes,
and measuring individual trajectories. Such models help distinguish
normative variability from clinically relevant deviations, a persistent
challenge in neurology and psychiatry. For example, accounting for
ancestry, lifestyle, social risks, and environmental exposures improves
the identiﬁcation of subclinical brain aging or stress-related vulnerabilities and resilience before disease onset16,192,193,218. Prediction models should support a broader goal: understanding how individuals
respond to environmental risks and interventions across the life
course16, rather than simply classifying disease states.
Future research should also bring more science of neurodevelopmental factors. Studying these factors can help minimize the risk of
overemphasizing or misattributing the inﬂuence of factors from
adulthood or older age in brain disorders260. Early-life adversities such

as adversity, malnutrition, infections, and lack of cognitive stimulation
are linked to disruptions in critical neurodevelopmental stages261 and
contribute to the onset of psychiatric262 and neurological
conditions263,264. This approach can explain mechanistically how such
adversities affect biological pathways leading to brain disorders260.
Despite the importance of early exposures in brain disorders89–91,256, yet
most large-scale datasets lack of further assessment of neurodevelopmental measures to trace these trajectories. Expanding lifespan
cohorts that capture neurodevelopmental milestones is crucial to
understanding how early-life pathways contribute to midlife psychiatric and neurological disorders and their progression to late-life
diseases220,221. Developmentally informed computational approaches,
drawing on dynamic causal modeling, biophysical modeling, and
normative modeling265 may enable more precise, equitable predictions
by identifying deviations across lifespan that impact brain health
outcomes.
Transdisciplinary collaboration is required to achieve multimodal
diversity in clinical sciences, neuroscience, biology, epidemiology,
computational modeling, and public health. Cutting-edge technologies (e.g., AI and biophysical modeling), knowledge sharing266, and
open science practices and, are essential for future development. The
brain capital267 and syndemics172,268,269 agendas can drive transdisciplinary innovation regarding critical challenges (climate change, pollution/plastics, conﬂict and stress, economic innovation) for brain and
mental wealth13,267.

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

Towards addressing ethical, social, and technical barriers
Structural inequities shape data access, governance, and commercialization, reinforcing disparities in data ownership and use. Academia
sets priorities, industry monetizes data, and policymakers regulate
access—roles that can perpetuate or challenge injustice. Expanding
datasets without safeguards risks eroding participant rights and centralizing control. Diversity must be valued not only for scientiﬁc
validity but as a core ethical principle. To prevent harm, frameworks
like WHO, STANDING Together, and FAIR36,39,103,218,270–275 can promote
participatory governance, transparency, and fair beneﬁt-sharing. AI
bias on health data often arises from underrepresentation and uneven
data quality100, compromising fairness, generalizability, and
impact276,277. Restricted diversity can entrench health disparities100, but
the solution must go beyond correcting algorithmic bias to embed
ethical oversight, structural awareness, and stakeholder inclusion into
equitable brain health modeling. Models must capture real-world
heterogeneity, integrate multilevel data, and be co-developed with
communities. Transparent governance276,278, global data-sharing
frameworks103, and accountability are required prevent AI from reinforcing disparities. Other ethical risks linked to AI and big data, corporate misuse, circular predictions, conﬁrmation bias, and automated
decisions in low-interpretability models should not be
underestimated276. Data protection, especially in the context of
12

Perspective
generative models capable of re-identifying individuals and challenging anonymization efforts need to be addressed32,113,279.
Citizen science280, community-based system dynamics, digital
technologies, and participatory research approaches267,280 can help to
democratize this framework. These strategies promote culturally
competent recruitment and radical collaboration with community
stakeholders, informing the equitable mapping of complex systems
inﬂuencing health outcomes, including social determinants, healthcare access, and cultural factors281. Promoting equitable data sharing
across jurisdictions, fostering public-private partnerships, building
capacity in low-resource settings for active participation in discoveries,
and reducing institutional and national barriers are crucial for advancing brain health interventions globally281. Such methods identify critical leverage points to improve data representation and accuracy,
leading to practical, sustainable data capture tools and meaningful
interventions for diverse populations267,280. We believe this framework
will help to establish frank global brain health research agenda that
beneﬁts all populations, ensuring equity in knowledge and care across
regions.
The proposed framework leverages advances in global multilevel
data, theoretical and computational modeling, and transdisciplinary
collaboration to build more comprehensive precision models of brain
health. This approach may enhance our future understanding of
complex brain health dynamics and intrinsically commit to equity,
warranting scientiﬁc advancements beneﬁt all people across the world.

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3
15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

References
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.
14.

Collaborators, G. B. D. F. Burden of disease scenarios for 204
countries and territories, 2022-2050: a forecasting analysis for the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2021. Lancet 403,
2204–2256 (2024).
Harris, E. Neurological conditions are leading cause of disability
worldwide. JAMA 331, 1440 (2024).
Momen, N. C. et al. Association between mental disorders and
subsequent medical conditions. N. Engl. J. Med 382,
1721–1731 (2020).
Collaborators, G. B. D. M. D Global, regional, and national burden
of 12 mental disorders in 204 countries and territories, 1990-2019:
a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019.
Lancet Psychiatry 9, 137–150 (2022).
Steinmetz, J. D. et al. Global, regional, and national burden of
disorders affecting the nervous system, 1990–2021: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021. Lancet
Neurol. 23, 344–381 (2024).
Feigin, V. L. et al. Global, regional, and national burden of stroke
and its risk factors, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global
Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Neurol. 20, 795–820 (2021).
Wig, G. S. et al. Participant diversity is necessary to advance brain
aging research. Trends Cogn. Sci. 28, 92–96 (2024).
McGorry, P. D. et al. The lancet psychiatry commission on youth
mental health. Lancet Psychiatry 11, 731–774 (2024).
Hernandez, H. et al. The exposome of healthy and accelerated
aging across 40 countries. Nat. Med 31, 3089–3100 (2025).
Moguilner, S. et al. Brain clocks capture diversity and disparities in
aging and dementia across geographically diverse populations.
Nat. Med 30, 3646–3657 (2024).
Ibanez, A. The mind’s golden cage and cognition in the wild.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 26, 1031–1034 (2022).
Ibanez, A. Inspired by struggle: a personal journey to global precision brain health. iScience 28, 111918 (2025).
Ibanez, A. et al. Neuroecological links of the exposome and one
health. Neuron 112, 1905–1910 (2024).
Ibanez, A. & Zimmer, E. R. Time to synergize mental health with
brain health. Nat. Ment. Health 1, 441–443 (2023).

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

25.

26.
27.

28.
29.

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

36.

37.

38.

Ibanez, A., Kringelbach, M. L. & Deco, G. A synergetic turn in
cognitive neuroscience of brain diseases. Trends Cogn. Sci. 28,
319–338 (2024).
Udeh-Momoh, C. T. et al. Resilience and brain health in global
populations. Nat. Med 31, 2518–2531 (2025).
Lengnick-Hall, R. et al. Eight characteristics of rigorous multilevel
implementation research: a step-by-step guide. Implement Sci.
18, 52 (2023).
Holmes, J. H. et al. Challenges for multilevel health disparities
research in a transdisciplinary environment. Am. J. Prev. Med 35,
S182–S192 (2008).
Lee, S. et al. Multimodal integration of neuroimaging and genetic
data for the diagnosis of mood disorders based on computer
vision models. J. Psychiatr. Res. 172, 144–155 (2024).
Morton, J. T. et al. Multi-level analysis of the gut-brain axis shows
autism spectrum disorder-associated molecular and microbial
proﬁles. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 1208–1217 (2023).
Ressler, K. J. & Williams, L. M. Big data in psychiatry: multiomics,
neuroimaging, computational modeling, and digital phenotyping.
Neuropsychopharmacology 46, 1–2 (2021).
Rohaut, B. et al. Multimodal assessment improves neuroprognosis
performance in clinically unresponsive critical-care patients with
brain injury. Nat. Med 30, 2349–2355 (2024).
Gabitto, M. I. et al. Integrated multimodal cell atlas of Alzheimer’s
disease. Nat. Neurosci. 27, 2366–2383 (2024).
Duggan, M. R. et al. Proteomics identiﬁes potential immunological
drivers of postinfection brain atrophy and cognitive decline. Nat.
Aging 4, 1263–1278 (2024).
Holmes, E. A. et al. Multidisciplinary research priorities for the
COVID-19 pandemic: a call for action for mental health science.
Lancet Psychiatry 7, 547–560 (2020).
Bjerke, I. E. et al. Data integration through brain atlasing: human
brain project tools and strategies. Eur. Psychiatry 50, 70–76 (2018).
Doyle, A. E. et al. Advancing mental health research through
strategic integration of transdiagnostic dimensions and genomics. Biol. Psychiatry 97, 450–460 (2025).
Liu, L., Feigin, V., Sacco, R. L. & Koroshetz, W. J. Promoting global
collaboration for brain health research. BMJ 371, m3753 (2020).
Owolabi, M. O. et al. Global synergistic actions to improve brain
health for human development. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 19,
371–383 (2023).
Haken, H. Synergetics of brain function. Int J. Psychophysiol. 60,
110–124 (2006).
Poline, J. B. et al. Data and tools integration in the Canadian Open
Neuroscience Platform. Sci. Data 10, 189 (2023).
Matshabane, O. P. Promoting diversity and inclusion in neuroscience and neuroethics. EBioMedicine 67, 103359 (2021).
Hachinski, V. Integral brain health: Cerebral/mental/social provisional deﬁnitions. Alzheimers Dement 19, 3226–3230 (2023).
Greene, A. S. et al. Brain-phenotype models fail for individuals who
defy sample stereotypes. Nature 609, 109–118 (2022).
Stephan, B. C., Kurth, T., Matthews, F. E., Brayne, C. & Dufouil, C.
Dementia risk prediction in the population: are screening models
accurate? Nat. Rev. Neurol. 6, 318–326 (2010).
Xue, D., Blue, E. E., Conomos, M. P. & Fohner, A. E. The power of
representation: Statistical analysis of diversity in US Alzheimer’s
disease genetics data. Alzheimers Dement (N. Y) 10,
e12462 (2024).
Gorelick, P. B., Hainsworth, A. H. & Wallin, A. What will it take to
achieve brain health globally? Cereb. Circ. Cogn. Behav. 6,
100209 (2024).
Lydon-Staley, D. M., Cornblath, E. J., Blevins, A. S. & Bassett, D. S.
Modeling brain, symptom, and behavior in the winds of change.
Neuropsychopharmacology 46, 20–32 (2021).

13

Perspective
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.
49.

50.

51.
52.
53.
54.

55.
56.

57.

58.

59.
60.

61.

Matshabane, O. P., Whitted, C. G. & Koehly, L. M. Addressing
diversity and inclusion challenges in global neuro-psychiatric and
behavioral genomics research. Front Genet. 13, 1021649 (2022).
Baez, S., Alladi, S. & Ibanez, A. Global South research is critical for
understanding brain health, ageing and dementia. Clin. Transl.
Med 13, e1486 (2023).
Eteleeb, A. M. et al. Brain high-throughput multi-omics data reveal
molecular heterogeneity in Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS Biol. 22,
e3002607 (2024).
Step, K., Ndong Sima, C. A. A., Mata, I. & Bardien, S. Exploring the
role of underrepresented populations in polygenic risk scores for
neurodegenerative disease risk prediction. Front Neurosci. 18,
1380860 (2024).
Kunkle, B. W. et al. Novel Alzheimer disease risk loci and pathways
in African American individuals using the African Genome
Resources Panel: a meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol. 78, 102–113 (2021).
Rajabli, F. et al. Ancestral origin of ApoE epsilon4 Alzheimer disease risk in Puerto Rican and African American populations. PLoS
Genet 14, e1007791 (2018).
Parra, M. A. et al. Dementia in Latin America: paving the way
toward a regional action plan. Alzheimers Dement 17,
295–313 (2021).
Kandiah, N. et al. Current and future trends in biomarkers for the
early detection of Alzheimer’s Disease in Asia: Expert Opinion. J.
Alzheimers Dis. Rep. 6, 699–710 (2022).
Meeker, K. L. et al. Socioeconomic status mediates racial differences seen using the AT(N) framework. Ann. Neurol. 89,
254–265 (2021).
Migeot, J. et al. Social exposome and brain health outcomes of
dementia across Latin America. Nat. Commun. 16, 8196 (2025).
Ibanez, A., Legaz, A. & Ruiz-Adame, M. Addressing the gaps
between socioeconomic disparities and biological models of
dementia. Brain 146, 3561–3564 (2023).
Stephan, B. C. M. et al. Prediction of dementia risk in low-income
and middle-income countries (the 10/66 Study): an independent
external validation of existing models. Lancet Glob. Health 8,
e524–e535 (2020).
McGlinchey, E. et al. Biomarkers of neurodegeneration across the
Global South. Lancet Healthy Longev. 5, 100616 (2024).
Taylor, D. J. et al. Sources of gene expression variation in a globally
diverse human cohort. Nature 632, 122–130 (2024).
Santamaria-Garcia, H. et al. Factors associated with healthy aging
in Latin American populations. Nat. Med 29, 2248–2258 (2023).
Mostert, C. M. et al. Broadening dementia risk models: building on
the 2024 Lancet Commission report for a more inclusive global
framework. EBioMedicine 120, 105950 (2025).
Fittipaldi, S., Migeot, J. & Ibanez, A. Socioeconomic disparities
harm social cognition. Trends Cogn. Sci. 28, 386–387 (2024).
Li, J. et al. Cross-ethnicity/race generalization failure of behavioral
prediction from resting-state functional connectivity. Sci. Adv. 8,
eabj1812 (2022).
Raman, R. et al. Disparities by race and ethnicity among adults
recruited for a preclinical alzheimer disease trial. JAMA Netw.
Open 4, e2114364 (2021).
Liu, F. et al. Environmental neuroscience linking exposome to
brain structure and function underlying cognition and behavior.
Mol. Psychiatry 28, 17–27 (2023).
Bruxel, E. M. et al. Psychiatric genetics in the diverse landscape of
Latin American populations. Nat. Genet. 57, 1074–1088 (2025).
Hazelton, J. L. et al. Cardiovascular risk factors and the allostatic
interoceptive network in dementia. Cardiovasc Res, 121,
cvaf185 (2025).
Miranda, J. J. et al. Understanding the rise of cardiometabolic
diseases in low- and middle-income countries. Nat. Med 25,
1667–1679 (2019).

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3
62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.
69.

70.
71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.
82.
83.

Wojcik, G. L. et al. Genetic analyses of diverse populations
improves discovery for complex traits. Nature 570,
514–518 (2019).
Liao, Y. et al. Surveillance of health status in minority
communities-racial and ethnic approaches to community health
across the US (REACH US) risk factor survey, United States, 2009.
MMWR Surveill. Summ. 60, 1–44 (2011).
Santamaria-Garcia, H. et al. Allostatic interoceptive overload
across psychiatric and neurological conditions. Biol. Psychiatry 97,
28–40 (2025).
Sathyanarayanan, A. et al. Multi-omics data integration methods
and their applications in psychiatric disorders. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 69, 26–46 (2023).
Zhang, X. et al. Discrimination exposure impacts unhealthy processing of food cues: crosstalk between the brain and gut. Nat.
Ment. Health 1, 841–852 (2023).
Legaz, A. et al. Structural inequality linked to brain volume and
network dynamics in aging and dementia across the Americas.
Nat. Aging 5, 259–274 (2025).
Maitre, L. et al. Multi-omics signatures of the human early life
exposome. Nat. Commun. 13, 7024 (2022).
Yoon, J. H. et al. Integrative approach of omics and imaging data to
discover new insights for understanding brain diseases. Brain
Commun. 6, fcae265 (2024).
Vieira, S. et al. Multivariate brain-behaviour associations in psychiatric disorders. Transl. Psychiatry 14, 231 (2024).
Teufel, C. & Fletcher, P. C. The promises and pitfalls of applying
computational models to neurological and psychiatric disorders.
Brain 139, 2600–2608 (2016).
Dhamala, E., Yeo, B. T. T. & Holmes, A. J. One size does not ﬁt all:
methodological considerations for brain-based predictive modeling in psychiatry. Biol. Psychiatry 93, 717–728 (2023).
Falcon, M. I., Jirsa, V. & Solodkin, A. A new neuroinformatics
approach to personalized medicine in neurology: The Virtual
Brain. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 29, 429–436 (2016).
Lee, Y. S., Garrido, N. L. B., Lord, G., Maggio, Z. A. & Khomtchouk,
B. B. Ethical considerations for biobanks serving underrepresented populations. Bioethics 39, 240–249 (2025).
Schoeler, T. et al. Participation bias in the UK Biobank distorts
genetic associations and downstream analyses. Nat. Hum. Behav.
7, 1216–1227 (2023).
Collin, C. B. et al. Computational models for clinical applications in
personalized medicine-guidelines and recommendations for data
integration and model validation. J. Pers. Med. 12, 166 (2022).
Moguilner, S. et al. Multi-feature computational framework for
combined signatures of dementia in underrepresented settings. J.
Neural Eng. 19, 4 (2022).
Moguilner, S. et al. Biophysical models applied to dementia
patients reveal links between geographical origin, gender, disease
duration, and loss of neural inhibition. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 16,
79 (2024).
Hernandez, H. et al. Brain health in diverse settings: How age,
demographics and cognition shape brain function. Neuroimage
295, 120636 (2024).
Gonzalez-Gomez, R. et al. Educational disparities in brain health
and dementia across Latin America and the United States. Alzheimers Dement 20, 5912–5925 (2024).
Herzog, R. et al. Genuine high-order interactions in brain networks
and neurodegeneration. Neurobiol. Dis. 175, 105918 (2022).
Sanz Perl, Y. et al. Model-based whole-brain perturbational landscape of neurodegenerative diseases. Elife 12, e83970 (2023).
Coronel-Oliveros, C. et al. Viscous dynamics associated with
hypoexcitation and structural disintegration in neurodegeneration
via generative whole-brain modeling. Alzheimers Dement 20,
3228–3250 (2024).

14

Perspective
84.

85.
86.
87.

88.
89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.
96.

97.
98.
99.
100.

101.

102.

103.
104.
105.

106.

Leonardsen, E. H. et al. Constructing personalized characterizations of structural brain aberrations in patients with dementia
using explainable artiﬁcial intelligence. NPJ Digit Med 7,
110 (2024).
Bycroft, C. et al. The UK Biobank resource with deep phenotyping
and genomic data. Nature 562, 203–209 (2018).
Kurki, M. I. et al. FinnGen provides genetic insights from a wellphenotyped isolated population. Nature 613, 508–518 (2023).
Gilmore-Bykovskyi, A. L. et al. Recruitment and retention of
underrepresented populations in Alzheimer’s disease research: A
systematic review. Alzheimers Dement (N. Y) 5, 751–770 (2019).
Parra, M. A. Overcoming barriers in cognitive assessment of Alzheimer’s disease. Dement Neuropsychol. 8, 95–98 (2014).
Bhutta, Z. A., Bhavnani, S., Betancourt, T. S., Tomlinson, M. & Patel,
V. Adverse childhood experiences and lifelong health. Nat. Med
29, 1639–1648 (2023).
Soh, Y. et al. State-level indicators of childhood educational
quality and incident dementia in older black and white adults.
JAMA Neurol. 80, 352–359 (2023).
Farina, F. R. et al. Next generation brain health: transforming global research and public health to promote prevention of dementia
and reduce its risk in young adult populations. Lancet Healthy
Longev. 5, 100665 (2024).
Raju, R. M. & Tsai, L. H. Dismantling silos: the case for an integrated
approach to address childhood determinants of lifelong brain
health. Neuron 111, 3706–3709 (2023).
Bolleddula, J. et al. No person left behind: Mapping the health
policy landscape for genomics research in the Caribbean. Lancet
Reg. Health Am. 15, 100367 (2022).
Signore, I. A. et al. The Chilean COVID-19 genomics network
biorepository: a resource for multi-omics studies of COVID-19 and
long COVID in a Latin American Population. Genes (Basel) 15,
1352 (2024).
Sohail, M. et al. Mexican Biobank advances population and medical genomics of diverse ancestries. Nature 622, 775–783 (2023).
Prado, P. et al. The BrainLat project, a multimodal neuroimaging
dataset of neurodegeneration from underrepresented backgrounds. Sci. Data 10, 889 (2023).
All of Us Research Program Genomics, I Genomic data in the all of
us research program. Nature 627, 340–346 (2024).
Bethlehem, R. A. I. et al. Brain charts for the human lifespan. Nature
604, 525–533 (2022).
Devaney, S. A., Malerba, L. & Manson, S. M. The “All of Us” Program
and Indigenous Peoples. N. Engl. J. Med 383, 1892 (2020).
Ibrahim, H., Liu, X., Zariffa, N., Morris, A. D. & Denniston, A. K.
Health data poverty: an assailable barrier to equitable digital
health care. Lancet Digit Health 3, e260–e265 (2021).
Ibanez, A., Parra, M. A., Butler, C. & Latin, A. & the Caribbean
Consortium on, D. The Latin America and the caribbean consortium on dementia (LAC-CD): from networking to research to
implementation science. J. Alzheimers Dis. 82, S379–S394 (2021).
Blaisdell, C. J. et al. The NIH ECHO program: investigating how
early environmental inﬂuences affect child health. Pediatr. Res.
92, 1215–1216 (2022).
Bajcsy, P. et al. Enabling global image data sharing in the life
sciences. Nat. Methods 22, 672–676 (2025).
Mulder, N. et al. H3Africa: current perspectives. Pharmgenomics
Pers. Med 11, 59–66 (2018).
Rosenberg, A., Mangialasche, F., Ngandu, T., Solomon, A. & Kivipelto, M. Multidomain interventions to prevent cognitive impairment, alzheimer’s disease, and dementia: from FINGER to WorldWide FINGERS. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis. 7, 29–36 (2020).
Duran-Aniotz, C. et al. The Latin American Brain Health Institute, a
regional initiative to reduce the scale and impact of dementia.
Alzheimers Dement 18, 1696–1698 (2022).

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3
107. Ibanez, A. et al. The multi-partner consortium to expand
dementia research in Latin America (ReDLat): Driving Multicentric Research and Implementation Science. Front Neurol.
12, 631722 (2021).
108. Bigdeli, T. B. et al. Contributions of common genetic variants to
risk of schizophrenia among individuals of African and Latino
ancestry. Mol. Psychiatry 25, 2455–2467 (2020).
109. Cuellar-Barboza, A. B. et al. Polygenic prediction of bipolar disorder in a Latin American sample. Am. J. Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr. Genet. 192, 139–146 (2023).
110. Meng, X. et al. Multi-ancestry genome-wide association study of
major depression aids locus discovery, ﬁne mapping, gene
prioritization and causal inference. Nat. Genet. 56,
222–233 (2024).
111. Kim, J. J. et al. Multi-ancestry genome-wide association metaanalysis of Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Genet. 56, 27–36 (2024).
112. Keene, K. L. et al. Genome-wide association study meta-analysis of
stroke in 22000 individuals of African descent identiﬁes novel
associations with stroke. Stroke 51, 2454–2463 (2020).
113. Martin, A. R. et al. Clinical use of current polygenic risk scores may
exacerbate health disparities. Nat. Genet. 51, 584–591 (2019).
114. Atkinson, E. G. et al. Tractor uses local ancestry to enable the
inclusion of admixed individuals in GWAS and to boost power. Nat.
Genet. 53, 195–204 (2021).
115. Stevenson, A. et al. Neuropsychiatric Genetics of African
Populations-Psychosis (NeuroGAP-Psychosis): a case-control
study protocol and GWAS in Ethiopia, Kenya, South Africa and
Uganda. BMJ Open 9, e025469 (2019).
116. Bruxel, E. M. et al. Psychiatric genetics in the diverse landscape of
Latin American populations. Nat. Genet. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41588-025-02127-z (2025).
117. Song, Y. et al. Multitrait genetic analysis identiﬁes novel pleiotropic loci for depression and schizophrenia in East Asians. Schizophr. Bull. 51, 684–695 (2025).
118. Lam, M. et al. Comparative genetic architectures of schizophrenia
in East Asian and European populations. Nat. Genet. 51,
1670–1678 (2019).
119. Yue, W., Yu, X. & Zhang, D. Progress in genome-wide association
studies of schizophrenia in Han Chinese populations. NPJ Schizophr. 3, 24 (2017).
120. Han, Y. et al. Genetic risk and prognosis of the ﬁrst incident stroke
survivors: ﬁndings from China Kadoorie Biobank and UK Biobank.
Neurology 105, e213832 (2025).
121. Acosta-Uribe, J. et al. A neurodegenerative disease landscape of
rare mutations in Colombia due to founder effects. Genome Med
14, 27 (2022).
122. Acosta-Uribe, J. et al. Genetic contributions to alzheimer’s disease
and frontotemporal dementia in admixed Latin American Populations. Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.29.
24315197 (2024).
123. Zapata-Restrepo, L. M. et al. Case of early onset Alzheimer’s disease associated with a novel PSEN1 variant identiﬁed in Colombia.
NPJ Dement 1, 31 (2025).
124. Quiroz, Y. T. et al. APOE3 Christchurch heterozygosity and autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med 390,
2156–2164 (2024).
125. Lopera, F. et al. Resilience to autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s
disease in a Reelin-COLBOS heterozygous man. Nat. Med 29,
1243–1252 (2023).
126. Ray, N. R. et al. Extended genome-wide association study
employing the African genome resources panel identiﬁes novel
susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease in individuals of African
ancestry. Alzheimers Dement 20, 5247–5261 (2024).
127. Naslavsky, M. S. et al. Global and local ancestry modulate APOE
association with Alzheimer’s neuropathology and cognitive

15

Perspective

128.

129.

130.
131.

132.
133.
134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.
144.
145.

146.
147.
148.

149.

outcomes in an admixed sample. Mol. Psychiatry 27,
4800–4808 (2022).
Hazelton, J. L. et al. Neuroimaging meta-analyses reveal convergence of interoception, emotion, and social cognition across
neurodegenerative diseases. Biol. Psychiatry 97,
1079–1090 (2025).
Migeot, J. A., Duran-Aniotz, C. A., Signorelli, C. M., Piguet, O. &
Ibanez, A. A predictive coding framework of allostaticinteroceptive overload in frontotemporal dementia. Trends Neurosci. 45, 838–853 (2022).
Migeot, J. et al. Allostasis, health, and development in Latin
America. Neurosci. Biobehav Rev. 162, 105697 (2024).
Hazelton, J. L. et al. Altered spatiotemporal brain dynamics of
interoception in behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia.
EBioMedicine 113, 105614 (2025).
Wen, J. Towards a multi-organ, multi-omics medical digital twin.
Nat. Biomed. Eng. 9, 1386–1389 (2025).
Birba, A. et al. Allostatic-interoceptive overload in frontotemporal
dementia. Biol. Psychiatry 92, 54–67 (2022).
Liufu, C. et al. Integration of multi-omics summary data reveals the
role of N6-methyladenosine in neuropsychiatric disorders. Mol.
Psychiatry 29, 3141–3150 (2024).
Xu, J. et al. Neurobiological substrates underlying the effect of
genomic risk for depression on the conversion of amnestic mild
cognitive impairment. Brain 141, 3457–3471 (2018).
Bao, J. et al. Integrative analysis of multi-omics and imaging data
with incorporation of biological information via structural Bayesian factor analysis. Brief Bioinform https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/
bbad073 (2023).
Clark, C., Rabl, M., Dayon, L. & Popp, J. The promise of multi-omics
approaches to discover biological alterations with clinical relevance
in Alzheimer’s disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 14, 1065904 (2022).
Ravichandran, K. A. & Heneka, M. T. Inﬂammasomes in neurological disorders - mechanisms and therapeutic potential. Nat. Rev.
Neurol. 20, 67–83 (2024).
Badhwar, A. et al. A multiomics approach to heterogeneity in
Alzheimer’s disease: focused review and roadmap. Brain 143,
1315–1331 (2020).
Pape, K., Tamouza, R., Leboyer, M. & Zipp, F. Immunoneuropsychiatry - novel perspectives on brain disorders. Nat. Rev.
Neurol. 15, 317–328 (2019).
Monari, S. et al. Blunted Glucocorticoid Responsiveness to Stress
Causes Behavioral and Biological Alterations That Lead to Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Vulnerability. Biol. Psychiatry 95,
762–773 (2024).
Luo, J. et al. Genetic regulation of human brain proteome reveals
proteins implicated in psychiatric disorders. Mol. Psychiatry 29,
3330–3343 (2024).
Ren, P. et al. Atlas of Proteomic signatures of brain structure and
its links to brain disorders. Nat. Commun. 16, 5092 (2025).
Fan, J. W. et al. Transcriptomics and magnetic resonance imaging
in major psychiatric disorders. Front Psychiatry 14, 1185471 (2023).
Wang, Y. et al. Multi-modal intermediate integrative methods in
neuropsychiatric disorders: A review. Comput Struct. Biotechnol.
J. 20, 6149–6162 (2022).
Mao, Q. et al. Spatial multiomics analysis in psychiatric disorders.
EC Psychol. Psychiatr. 12, 1–5 (2023).
Zhang, H. et al. Mass spectrometry imaging for spatially resolved
multi-omics molecular mapping. Npj Imaging 2, 20 (2024).
Dubois, B. et al. Alzheimer disease as a clinical-biological construct-an international working group recommendation. JAMA
Neurol. 81, 1304–1311 (2024).
Gleason, C. E. et al. Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in Black and
non-Hispanic White cohorts: A contextualized review of the evidence. Alzheimers Dement 18, 1545–1564 (2022).

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3
150. Parra, M. A. et al. Biomarkers for dementia in Latin American countries: Gaps and opportunities. Alzheimers Dement 19, 721–735 (2023).
151. Xu, J. et al. A causal association of ANKRD37 with human hippocampal volume. Mol. Psychiatry 27, 4432–4445 (2022).
152. Palmqvist, S. et al. Blood biomarkers to detect alzheimer disease
in primary care and secondary care. JAMA 332, 1245–1257 (2024).
153. Nativio, R. et al. An integrated multi-omics approach identiﬁes
epigenetic alterations associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat.
Genet. 52, 1024–1035 (2020).
154. Shen, Y. et al. CSF proteomics identiﬁes early changes in autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 187, 6309–6326
e6315 (2024).
155. Andrews, S. J. et al. The complex genetic architecture of Alzheimer’s disease: novel insights and future directions. EBioMedicine
90, 104511 (2023).
156. Benjamin, K. J. M. et al. Analysis of gene expression in the postmortem brain of neurotypical Black Americans reveals contributions of genetic ancestry. Nat. Neurosci. 27, 1064–1074 (2024).
157. Xue, C. et al. AI-based differential diagnosis of dementia etiologies
on multimodal data. Nat. Med 30, 2977–2989 (2024).
158. Wang, M. et al. Transformative network modeling of multi-omics
data reveals detailed circuits, key regulators, and potential therapeutics for alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 109, 257–272e214 (2021).
159. Heffel, M. G. et al. Temporally distinct 3D multi-omic dynamics in
the developing human brain. Nature 635, 481–489 (2024).
160. Chen, Z. et al. Sampling inequalities affect generalization of
neuroimaging-based diagnostic classiﬁers in psychiatry. BMC
Med 21, 241 (2023).
161. Chen, C. et al. Applications of multi-omics analysis in human
diseases. MedComm (2020) 4, e315 (2023).
162. Wu, Y. & Xie, L. AI-driven multi-omics integration for multi-scale
predictive modeling of genotype-environment-phenotype relationships. Comput Struct. Biotechnol. J. 27, 265–277 (2025).
163. McEwen, C. A. Connecting the biology of stress, allostatic load
and epigenetics to social structures and processes. Neurobiol.
Stress 17, 100426 (2022).
164. Bonham, L. W. et al. DNA methylation age from peripheral blood
predicts progression to Alzheimer’s disease, white matter disease
burden, and cortical atrophy. NPJ Dement 1, 7 (2025).
165. Caviedes, A. et al. Epigenetics of dementia remains unraveled in
Latin American and Caribbean populations: A call for collaborative
efforts. Alzheimers Dement 20, 9076–9078 (2024).
166. Cevik, S. E. et al. DNA methylation of imprint control regions
associated with Alzheimer’s disease in non-Hispanic Blacks and
non-Hispanic Whites. Clin. Epigenetics 16, 58 (2024).
167. Horvath, S. et al. An epigenetic clock analysis of race/ethnicity,
sex, and coronary heart disease. Genome Biol. 17, 171 (2016).
168. Oh, H. S. et al. Organ aging signatures in the plasma proteome
track health and disease. Nature 624, 164–172 (2023).
169. Nie, C. et al. Distinct biological ages of organs and systems
identiﬁed from a multi-omics study. Cell Rep. 38, 110459 (2022).
170. Mulder, D., Aarts, E., Arias Vasquez, A. & Bloemendaal, M. A systematic review exploring the association between the human gut
microbiota and brain connectivity in health and disease. Mol.
Psychiatry 28, 5037–5061 (2023).
171. Finch, C. E. & Kulminski, A. M. The alzheimer’s disease exposome.
Alzheimers Dement 15, 1123–1132 (2019).
172. Mendenhall, E., Kohrt, B. A., Logie, C. H. & Tsai, A. C. Syndemics
and clinical science. Nat. Med 28, 1359–1362 (2022).
173. Legaz, A., Baez, S. & Ibanez, A. Unequal burdens: How structural
socioeconomic inequality shapes brain health in aging and
dementia. Neuroscience 569, 245–247 (2025).
174. Best Rogowski, C. B. et al. Long-term air pollution exposure and
incident dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Planet Health 9, 101266 (2025).
16

Perspective
175.

176.
177.

178.

179.
180.

181.

182.

183.

184.
185.

186.

187.

188.
189.

190.

191.

192.

193.
194.

195.

196.

197.

Fan, H. et al. Linking ambient air pollution to mental health: evidence based on the two-sample Mendelian randomization and
colocalization study. Transl. Psychiatry 14, 489 (2024).
Xu, J. et al. Effects of urban living environments on mental health
in adults. Nat. Med 29, 1456–1467 (2023).
Noble, K. G. et al. Family income, parental education and brain
structure in children and adolescents. Nat. Neurosci. 18,
773–778 (2015).
Rakesh, D., Zalesky, A. & Whittle, S. Assessment of Parent Income
and Education, Neighborhood Disadvantage, and Child Brain
Structure. JAMA Netw. Open 5, e2226208 (2022).
Ibanez, A. & Farombi, T. Biological imprint of education and rightsbased brain capital. Alzheimers Dement 21, e70222 (2025).
Gonzalez-Gomez, R. et al. Qualitative and quantitative educational
disparities and brain signatures in healthy aging and dementia
across global settings. EClinicalMedicine 82, 103187 (2025).
Chan, S. Y. et al. The inﬂuence of early-life adversity on the coupling of structural and functional brain connectivity across childhood. Nat. Ment. Health 2, 52–62 (2024).
Holz, N. E. et al. Early social adversity, altered brain functional
connectivity, and mental health. Biol. Psychiatry 93,
430–441 (2023).
Raymond, C. et al. Early childhood adversity and HPA axis activity
in adulthood:The importance of considering minimal age at
exposure. Psychoneuroendocrinology 124, 105042 (2021).
Furman, D. et al. Chronic inﬂammation in the etiology of disease
across the life span. Nat. Med 25, 1822–1832 (2019).
De Felice, F. G., Goncalves, R. A. & Ferreira, S. T. Impaired insulin
signalling and allostatic load in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 23, 215–230 (2022).
Boyd, R. J., Avramopoulos, D., Jantzie, L. L. & McCallion, A. S.
Neuroinﬂammation represents a common theme amongst
genetic and environmental risk factors for Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases. J. Neuroinﬂammation 19, 223 (2022).
Muscatell, K. A., Brosso, S. N. & Humphreys, K. L. Socioeconomic
status and inﬂammation: a meta-analysis. Mol. Psychiatry 25,
2189–2199 (2020).
Baez, S. et al. Structural inequality and temporal brain dynamics
across diverse samples. Clin. Transl. Med 14, e70032 (2024).
Ibanez, A. et al. Healthy aging meta-analyses and scoping review
of risk factors across Latin America reveal large heterogeneity and
weak predictive models. Nat. Aging 4, 1153–1165 (2024).
Noren Hooten, N., Pacheco, N. L., Smith, J. T. & Evans, M. K. The
accelerated aging phenotype: the role of race and social determinants of health on aging. Ageing Res. Rev. 73, 101536 (2022).
Martin, C. L., Ghastine, L., Lodge, E. K., Dhingra, R. & Ward-Caviness, C. K. Understanding health inequalities through the lens of
social epigenetics. Annu Rev. Public Health 43, 235–254 (2022).
Amoruso, L. et al. Multilingualism protects against accelerated
aging in cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses of 27 European
countries. Nat. Aging 5, 2340–2354 (2025).
Coronel-Oliveros, C. et al. Creative experiences and brain clocks.
Nat. Commun. 16, 8336 (2025).
Bobba-Alves, N. et al. Cellular allostatic load is linked to increased
energy expenditure and accelerated biological aging. Psychoneuroendocrinology 155, 106322 (2023).
Meeker, K. L. et al. Effects of structural and social determinants of
health and comorbidities on ethno-racial differences in ATN
plasma biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease: A HABS-HD study.
Alzheimer’s. Dement. 19, e078605 (2023).
Asken, B. M. et al. Plasma Alzheimer’s biomarkers and brain
amyloid in Hispanic and non-Hispanic older adults. Alzheimers
Dement 20, 437–446 (2024).
Bonomi, S. et al. Relationships of cognitive measures with cerebrospinal ﬂuid but not imaging biomarkers of alzheimer disease

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3
vary between black and white individuals. Ann. Neurol. 95,
495–506 (2024).
198. Hoyt, K. R. & Obrietan, K. Circadian clocks, cognition, and Alzheimer’s disease: synaptic mechanisms, signaling effectors, and
chronotherapeutics. Mol. Neurodegener. 17, 35 (2022).
199. Stephan, K. E., Iglesias, S., Heinzle, J. & Diaconescu, A. O. Translational perspectives for computational neuroimaging. Neuron 87,
716–732 (2015).
200. Lope, D. J., Demirhan, H. & Dolgun, A. Bayesian estimation of the
effect of health inequality in disease detection. Int J. Equity Health
21, 118 (2022).
201. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 11, 127–138 (2010).
202. Ibanez, A. Intellectual cyborgs and the future of science. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 27, 785–787 (2023).
203. Perl, Y. S. et al. Low-dimensional organization of global brain
states of reduced consciousness. Cell Rep. 42, 112491 (2023).
204. Naik, S., Banerjee, A., Bapi, R. S., Deco, G. & Roy, D. Metastability in
senescence. Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 509–521 (2017).
205. Cruzat, J. et al. Temporal irreversibility of large-scale brain
dynamics in alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 43,
1643–1656 (2023).
206. Ranasinghe, K. G. et al. Altered excitatory and inhibitory neuronal
subpopulation parameters are distinctly associated with tau and
amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease. Elife 11, e77850 (2022).
207. Patow, G., Martin, I., Sanz Perl, Y., Kringelbach, M. L. & Deco, G.
Whole-brain modelling: an essential tool for understanding brain
dynamics. Nat. Rev. Methods Prim. 4, 53 (2024).
208. Perl, Y. S. et al. The impact of regional heterogeneity in wholebrain dynamics in the presence of oscillations. Netw. Neurosci. 7,
632–660 (2023).
209. Amunts, K. et al. BigBrain: an ultrahigh-resolution 3D human brain
model. Science 340, 1472–1475 (2013).
210. Akarca, D., Vertes, P. E., Bullmore, E. T., Team, C. & Astle, D. E. A
generative network model of neurodevelopmental diversity in
structural brain organization. Nat. Commun. 12, 4216 (2021).
211. Lam, K. H. B., Faust, K., Yin, R., Fiala, C. & Diamandis, P. The brain
protein atlas: a conglomerate of proteomics datasets of human
neural tissue. Proteomics 22, e2200127 (2022).
212. Markello, R. D. et al. Neuromaps: structural and functional interpretation of brain maps. Nat. Methods 19, 1472–1479 (2022).
213. He, C., Liu, J., Zhu, Y. & Du, W. Data augmentation for deep neural
networks model in EEG classiﬁcation task: a review. Front Hum.
Neurosci. 15, 765525 (2021).
214. Moguilner, S. et al. Visual deep learning of unprocessed neuroimaging characterises dementia subtypes and generalises across
non-stereotypic samples. EBioMedicine 90, 104540 (2023).
215. Kraus, B. et al. Insights from personalized models of brain and
behavior for identifying biomarkers in psychiatry. Neurosci. Biobehav Rev. 152, 105259 (2023).
216. Roe, J. M. et al. Brain change trajectories in healthy adults correlate with Alzheimer’s related genetic variation and memory
decline across life. Nat. Commun. 15, 10651 (2024).
217. Williams, J. P. et al. A Bayesian approach to multistate hidden
Markov models: application to dementia progression. J. Am. Stat.
Assoc. 115, 16–31 (2020).
218. Armstrong, T. The myth of the normal brain: embracing neurodiversity. AMA J. Ethics 17, 348–352 (2015).
219. Bethlehem, R. A. et al. Brain charts for the human lifespan. Nature
604, 525–533 (2022).
220. Schor, N. F. & Bianchi, D. W. Neurodevelopmental clues to neurodegeneration. Pediatr. Neurol. 123, 67–76 (2021).
221. Shabani, K. & Hassan, B. A. The brain on time: links between
development and neurodegeneration. Development 150,
dev200397 (2023).
17

Perspective
222. Tozzi, L. et al. Personalized brain circuit scores identify clinically
distinct biotypes in depression and anxiety. Nat. Med. 30,
2076–2087 (2024).
223. Rutherford, S. et al. The normative modeling framework for
computational psychiatry. Nat. Protoc. 17, 1711–1734 (2022).
224. Scheffer, M. et al. A dynamical systems view of psychiatric disorders-theory: a review. JAMA Psychiatry 81, 618–623 (2024).
225. Jones, D. et al. A computational model of neurodegeneration in
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun. 13, 1643 (2022).
226. Krakauer, J. W., Ghazanfar, A. A., Gomez-Marin, A., MacIver, M. A. &
Poeppel, D. Neuroscience Needs Behavior: Correcting a Reductionist Bias. Neuron 93, 480–490 (2017).
227. Luppi, A. I. et al. A synergistic core for human brain evolution and
cognition. Nat. Neurosci. 25, 771–782 (2022).
228. Luppi, A. I. et al. Dynamical models to evaluate structure-function
relationships in network neuroscience. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 23,
767–768 (2022).
229. Vohryzek, J., Cabral, J., Vuust, P., Deco, G. & Kringelbach, M. L.
Understanding brain states across spacetime informed by wholebrain modelling. Philos. Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 380,
20210247 (2022).
230. Prattichizzo, F. et al. Organ-speciﬁc biological clocks: ageotyping
for personalized anti-aging medicine. Ageing Res Rev. 96,
102253 (2024).
231. O’Connor, D. B., Thayer, J. F. & Vedhara, K. Stress and health: a
review of psychobiological processes. Annu Rev. Psychol. 72,
663–688 (2021).
232. Kuhn, M. et al. Mismatch or allostatic load? Timing of life adversity
differentially shapes gray matter volume and anxious temperament. Soc. Cogn. Affect Neurosci. 11, 537–547 (2016).
233. Rodriquez, E. J., Kim, E. N., Sumner, A. E., Napoles, A. M. & PerezStable, E. J. Allostatic load: importance, markers, and score
determination in minority and disparity populations. J. Urban
Health 96, 3–11 (2019).
234. Juster, R. P., McEwen, B. S. & Lupien, S. J. Allostatic load biomarkers of chronic stress and impact on health and cognition.
Neurosci. Biobehav Rev. 35, 2–16 (2010).
235. Thomson, E. M. et al. Air pollution, stress, and allostatic load:
linking systemic and central nervous system impacts. J. Alzheimers Dis. 69, 597–614 (2019).
236. Hastings, P., Johnson, L., Ugarte, E., Robins, R. & Guyer, A. The
biological embedding of adversity and inequity: Examining the
physiological impacts of discrimination and poverty on ethnically
and economically minoritized youths. Psychoneuroendocrinology
153, 106261 (2023).
237. Kumsta, R. et al. The role of stress in the biological embedding of
experience. Psychoneuroendocrinology 156, 106364 (2023).
238. Erickson, A. C. & Sbihi, H. Biological embedding, the air we
breathe, and carcinogenesis. Lancet Planet Health 2,
e149–e150 (2018).
239. Eckstrand, K. L., Singh, M. K. & Ajilore, O. Diversity, equity, and
inclusivity in biological psychiatry research. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn.
Neurosci. Neuroimaging 7, 1195–1197 (2022).
240. Zurn, P., Stramondo, J., Reynolds, J. M. & Bassett, D. S. Expanding
diversity, equity, and inclusion to disability: opportunities for
biological psychiatry. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 7, 1280–1288 (2022).
241. Al-Mubarak, B. et al. Whole exome sequencing reveals inherited
and de novo variants in autism spectrum disorder: a trio study
from Saudi families. Sci. Rep. 7, 5679 (2017).
242. Kourtian, S. et al. Candidate genes for inherited autism susceptibility in the Lebanese population. Sci. Rep. 7, 45336 (2017).
243. Gupta, V. et al. Genetic Variant Analyses Identify Novel Candidate
Autism Risk Genes from a Highly Consanguineous Cohort of 104
Families from Oman. Int J. Mol. Sci. 25, 13700 (2024).

Nature Communications | (2025)16:11078

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67448-3
244. Soueid, J. et al. RYR2, PTDSS1 and AREG genes are implicated in a
Lebanese population-based study of copy number variation in
autism. Sci. Rep. 6, 19088 (2016).
245. Lencz, T. et al. Novel ultra-rare exonic variants identiﬁed in a
founder population implicate cadherins in schizophrenia. Neuron
109, 1465–1478e1464 (2021).
246. Mir, A., Khorram, E., Song, Y., Lee, H. & Tabatabaiefar, M. A. A novel
heterozygous truncating variant in the AGO1 gene in an Iranian
family with schizophrenia as an unreported symptom. Ann. Hum.
Genet 87, 295–301 (2023).
247. Colak-Genis, E. et al. Investigation of genetic changes in three
families with bipolar disease. Mol. Syndromol. 15, 464–473 (2024).
248. Fullerton, J. M. & Tesfaye, M. Global diversity in bipolar disorder:
the role of cultural and social differences with a view to genomics.
Biol. Psychiatry 98, 354–364 (2025).
249. Pries, L. K. et al. Predictive performance of exposome score for
schizophrenia in the general population. Schizophr. Bull. 47,
277–283 (2021).
250. Chiao, J. Y. & Blizinsky, K. D. Population disparities in mental
health: insights from cultural neuroscience. Am. J. Public Health
103, S122–S132 (2013).
251. Li, X. et al. The global burden of schizophrenia and the impact of
urbanization during 1990-2019: An analysis of the global burden of
disease study 2019. Environ. Res 232, 116305 (2023).
252. McFadyen, J. & Dolan, R. J. Spatiotemporal precision of neuroimaging in psychiatry. Biol. Psychiatry 93, 671–680 (2023).
253. Hauser, T. U., Skvortsova, V., De Choudhury, M. & Koutsouleris, N.
The promise of a model-based psychiatry: building computational
models of mental ill health. Lancet Digit Health 4,
e816–e828 (2022).
254. Halassa, M. M. et al. Developing algorithmic psychiatry via multilevel spanning computational models. Cell Rep. Med 6,
102094 (2025).
255. Bruckl, T. M. et al. The biological classiﬁcation of mental disorders
(BeCOME) study: a protocol for an observational deepphenotyping study for the identiﬁcation of biological subtypes.
BMC 