nature medicine
Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

Reliability of LLMs as medical assistants
for the general public: a randomized
preregistered study
Received: 4 May 2025
Accepted: 22 October 2025
Published online: 9 February 2026

Andrew M. Bean 1, Rebecca Elizabeth Payne 2,3,4, Guy Parsons 1,5,
Hannah Rose Kirk1, Juan Ciro6, Rafael Mosquera-Gómez 7,8, Sara Hincapié M7,8,
Aruna S. Ekanayaka 9, Lionel Tarassenko10, Luc Rocher 1,11 &
Adam Mahdi 1,11

Check for updates

Global healthcare providers are exploring the use of large language models
(LLMs) to provide medical advice to the public. LLMs now achieve nearly
perfect scores on medical licensing exams, but this does not necessarily
translate to accurate performance in real-world settings. We tested whether
LLMs can assist members of the public in identifying underlying conditions
and choosing a course of action (disposition) in ten medical scenarios in
a controlled study with 1,298 participants. Participants were randomly
assigned to receive assistance from an LLM (GPT-4o, Llama 3, Command R+)
or a source of their choice (control). Tested alone, LLMs complete the
scenarios accurately, correctly identifying conditions in 94.9% of cases and
disposition in 56.3% on average. However, participants using the same LLMs
identified relevant conditions in fewer than 34.5% of cases and disposition
in fewer than 44.2%, both no better than the control group. We identify
user interactions as a challenge to the deployment of LLMs for medical
advice. Standard benchmarks for medical knowledge and simulated patient
interactions do not predict the failures we find with human participants.
Moving forward, we recommend systematic human user testing to evaluate
interactive capabilities before public deployments in healthcare.
Recent breakthroughs in artificial intelligence (AI) research have the
potential to democratize healthcare by expanding access to medical knowledge, bringing care closer to patients. The development of
large language models (LLMs) such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT could enable
individuals to perform preliminary health assessments, receive personalized medical guidance and manage chronic conditions without
immediate clinician intervention. Testimonies of patients having used
LLMs to successfully diagnose their own conditions are now common1.

Surveys indicate that a growing number of people are already turning
to AI-powered chatbots for sensitive health-related inquiries, with one
in six American adults consulting AI chatbots for health information
at least once a month2,3.
Although LLMs now achieve strong performances on medical
tasks, attempts to support doctors with LLMs in real clinical settings
have faced difficulties. On the one hand, LLM scores on medical know­
ledge benchmarks are now commensurate with passing the US Medical

Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 2Nuffield Department of Primary Health Care Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
North Wales Medical School, Bangor University, Bangor, UK. 4Betsi Cadwaladr University Health Board, Ysbyty Gwynedd, Bangor, UK. 5National Health
Service, London, UK. 6Contextual AI, Mountain View, CA, USA. 7MLCommons, San Francisco, CA, USA. 8Factored AI, Palo Alto, CA, USA. 9Birmingham
Women’s and Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK. 10Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 11These authors
jointly supervised this work: L. Rocher, A. Mahdi.
e-mail: adam.mahdi@oii.ox.ac.uk
1

3

Nature Medicine | Volume 32 | February 2026 | 609–615

609

Article
Licensing Exam4. LLM-generated clinical documents are rated as equi­
valent to or better than those written by doctors5,6. On the other hand,
excelling at medical tasks in silico does not translate to accurate performance in clinical settings under physician guidance. For instance, one
study showed that radiologists assisted by AI did not perform better at
reading chest X-rays than without AI assistance, and both performed
worse than AI alone7. Another study showed that physicians assisted by
LLMs only marginally outperformed unassisted physicians in diagnosis
problems, and both performed worse than LLMs alone8. Providing
doctors with highly capable AI systems is not enough to meaningfully
assist them on important tasks9. Healthcare professionals often struggle to appropriately assess and incorporate AI-generated recommendations, limiting the benefits of AI assistance10–12.
More promising and easier to deploy, LLM-powered chatbots
have instead been suggested as a ‘new front door’ to healthcare for
patients who lack medical expertise13,14. As a first point of contact for
healthcare support, they could be used to broaden access to medical expertise and support overburdened health systems14–16. Medical
experts have had mixed opinions on the prospects of having LLMs
directly advise patients, citing problems of oversight and liability17
but also the possible benefits of providing support outside of clinical
settings18,19. In response to this opportunity, private companies have
made considerable efforts to create language models suitable for
healthcare applications20–22.
To understand whether LLMs can reliably support the general public and bring care closer to patients, we conducted a study with 1,298
UK participants. Each participant was tasked with identifying potential
health conditions and a recommended disposition (course of action)
in response to one of ten different medical scenarios. The scenarios
were developed by a group of three doctors who unanimously agreed
on the correct dispositions for each. The scenarios were then given to
a distinct group of four doctors to provide differential diagnoses (see
Fig. 1 for the study design).
We then randomly assigned participants to four experimental
arms, with stratification based on demographics to ensure that each
group had a composition similar to the national adult population.
Participants in three treatment groups were provided with an LLM
(GPT-4o, Llama 3, Command R+) for assistance in identifying conditions and dispositions—providing us with a diverse set of models that
could all be used for accessing medical information. Participants in the
control group were instructed to instead use any methods they would
typically employ at home.
First, despite selecting three LLMs that were successful at identifying dispositions and conditions alone, we found that participants
struggled to use them effectively. To explain these findings, we examined the transcripts of participant interactions with LLMs. Across
all transcripts, we found that LLMs usually suggested at least one
relevant condition—but less often than when LLMs alone were provided the entire scenario and tasked to output the relevant condition. We observed cases both of participants providing incomplete
information and of LLMs misinterpreting user queries leading to this
outcome. Furthermore, participants did not consistently follow these
recommendations, suggesting that the performance issues when
pairing participants with LLMs may be attributed to human–LLM
interaction failures.
Second, we show that evaluations on standard benchmarks—often
used to ensure safety and reliability before deployment—are not able
to predict human–LLM interaction failures. Medical knowledge is
typically benchmarked using questions from medical licensing examinations4. We compiled benchmark questions from topics matched to
our scenarios and compared LLM performance on these questions to
performance in the corresponding interactive testing for each model
and scenario. Performance in structured question-answering tasks,
higher than in interactive testing as expected in 26 out of 30 instances,
was largely uncorrelated to the interactive testing.
Nature Medicine | Volume 32 | February 2026 | 609–615

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

Finally, we show that simulations of user interactions with LLMs—
a promising method for creating realistic benchmarks—also do not
predict human–LLM interaction failures. Adapting the techniques
used to simulate patient interactions with LLMs23,24, we replicated our
interactive testing by replacing each of our human participants with an
LLM-simulated user. Compared to our interactive testing with human
participants, LLMs scored better on simulations. Crucially, the distribution of results did not reflect human variability, and results were only
weakly correlated to the interactive testing.
Taken together, our findings suggest that the safe deployment
of LLMs as public medical assistants will require capabilities beyond
expert-level medical knowledge. Despite strong performance on
medical benchmarks, providing people with current generations of
LLMs does not appear to improve their understanding of medical
information. Fixing that will require identifying why humans fail when
interacting with LLM-based tools—for example, aversion to technology and implicit biases against algorithms10,11,25 or LLM affordances
undermining trust in interactions26—and, crucially, how to design
more reliable and deterministic conversational LLM-based tools in
high-risk settings. Importantly, our work shows that solving these
challenges will require moving away from benchmarks and simulations
to systematically conduct safety testing with diverse, real users; this
is crucial to ensure the reliability of AI systems and enable potential
benefits for healthcare.

Results
To assess the risks of the public using LLMs for medical advice, we
conducted a randomized study where we asked participants to make
decisions about a medical scenario as though they had encountered it
at home (Fig. 1). We created ten scenarios where a patient must decide
whether and how to access professional medical treatment. In each
scenario, participants chose the best disposition on a five-point scale,
ranging from staying home to calling an ambulance, and listed the
medical conditions they had considered that led to their choice. We
scored the selected disposition based on whether it matched the answer
given by the three physicians involved in drafting the case. We scored
the listed medical conditions based on whether they appeared in a
gold-standard list of relevant conditions generated by four physicians
unfamiliar with the scenarios.
We recruited 1,298 participants living in the UK and over the age of
18 (Fig. 1b). Participants were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups or the control to provide a maximum of two responses,
with the sample population for each experimental condition stratified to reflect the demographics of the UK. Data collection continued
until 600 responses were collected for each experimental condition.
Participants in the treatment groups interacted with one of GPT-4o,
Llama 3 or Command R+ at least once per scenario and as many times
as they desired to help them decide how to respond to the questions.
We chose these models to represent widely used LLMs as well as the
approach of using internet search to augment responses. For the control group, we instructed participants to use any assistance they would
typically use at home (for example, internet search).

Task validation
As a validation of the potential usefulness of the LLMs for addressing
our specific set of ten scenarios, we provided the scenarios and questions directly to the models and sampled 60 responses per model per
scenario. The models were able to suggest at least one relevant condition in 94.7% of cases for GPT-4o, 99.2% of cases for Llama 3 and 90.8%
of cases for Command R+. The models’ accuracy in recommending
dispositions was 64.7% for GPT-4o, 48.8% for Llama 3 and 55.5% for
Command R+ (Fig. 2a). Overall, these scores indicate that the models
have the ability to provide useful medical information on these tasks,
performing better than random guessing between the five choices of
disposition or choosing medical conditions from our gold-standard
610

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

a

c
Online participants (n = 1,298)
assigned scenario and treatment

Three doctors collectively wrote
ten detailed medical scenarios

Specific case details

You are playing the part of a 20-year-old male patient who

GPT-4o
(n = 340)

is suddenly experiencing a really severe headache. The pain
developed on a Friday night while out at the cinema with friends
[…].

Llama 3
(n = 343)

Command R+
(n = 314)

Control
(n = 301)

My head really hurts […], what should I do?

General life details

You are a university student studying for a degree in electrical
engineering […].

It sounds like you might have meningitis […].

Additional medical history

…

You do not have any long-term health conditions, nor family
history of any health conditions […].

Online
assistance
without LLM

Okay, I’ll go to urgent care. Thanks!

d

b
Gold standard answers combine disposition (initial three doctors)
with plausible differential diagnoses (four additional doctors)

Participants identified
dispositions and
conditions

Disposition
Ambulance
A&E
Urgent Primary Care

Disposition

Subarachnoid hemorrhage

A&E

Meningitis

Urgent Primary Care

Cluster headache

Routine GP

…

Self-care

“I chose urgent care
because the
symptoms could
mean meningitis.”

Routine GP

Relevant conditions

Ambulance

Explanation

Self-care

Responses scored
using gold standard
answers

Disposition
Urgent Primary Care

Relevant conditions
Meningitis

Fig. 1 | Study design. a, Three doctors drafted ten medical scenarios, iteratively
revising them until they reached unanimous agreement about the best
disposition on a five-point scale from self-care to ambulance. b, Four additional
doctors read the scenarios and provided differential diagnoses, which were
combined to form gold-standard lists of relevant conditions. c, We recruited
1,298 participants and randomly assigned them to one of four experimental
conditions. Each participant was randomly allocated one of ten medical

scenarios. The treatment groups conversed with an LLM to help assess the
scenarios. The control group was permitted to use any method, with most
participants using internet search or their own knowledge. d, Top: participants
then chose a disposition and identified medical conditions that motivated their
choice. Participants completed two scenarios, until a total of 600 examples
were collected for each experimental condition. Bottom: we evaluated each
participant’s responses using the gold-standard answers.

lists to recommend at random and consistent with the strong performance of these models on other medical benchmarks6,22,27,28.

n1 = n2 = 600; GPT-4o, F = 0.536, P = 0.023; Llama 3, F = 0.529, P = 0.072;
Command R+, F = 0.514, P = 0.366, unadjusted).
Participants using LLMs consistently performed worse than
when the LLMs were directly provided with the scenario and task
(Fig. 2). For identifying relevant conditions, all three treatment groups
performed worse than their corresponding models without human
interaction (χ2(1), P < 0.001, n1 = n2 = 600). In the case of disposition,
GPT-4o and Command R+ performed better than any group of participants using LLMs (χ2(1), P < 0.001, n1 = n2 = 600), and the observed
mean was higher for Llama 3 as well but not statistically significant
(χ2(1) = 2.44, P = 0.118, n 1 = n2 = 600). Strong performance from
the LLMs operating alone is not sufficient for strong performance
with users.

Experimental performance
Figure 2b shows that participants using LLMs were significantly less
likely than those in the control group to correctly identify at least
one medical condition relevant to their scenario (χ2(1), n1 = n2 = 600,
P < 0.001 for all three models) and identified fewer relevant conditions on average (GPT-4o, 0.42–0.54; Llama 3, 0.39–0.50; Command
R+, 0.34–0.43; control, 0.55–0.67; bootstrap 95% confidence interval
(CI) with 1,000 resamples). Participants in the control group had 1.76
(95% CI = 1.45–2.13) times higher odds of identifying a relevant condition than the aggregate of the participants using LLMs. They were also
1.57 (95% CI = 1.28–1.92) times more likely to identify conditions from
the more serious ‘red flag’ list.
Participants using LLMs did not have statistically significant differences in disposition accuracy from the control group (GPT-4o,
χ2(1) = 0.17, P = 0.683; Llama 3, χ2(1) = 0.34, P = 0.560; Command
R+, χ2(1) = 0.03, P = 0.861; n1 = n2 = 600; Fig. 2b). The overall correct
response rate of 43.0% ± 2.0% exceeds a random guessing baseline of
20%, but most participants still chose an incorrect disposition. Participants using LLMs tended to underestimate the acuity of their conditions, as did the control group (Mann–Whitney U n1 = n2 = 600, P < 0.001
for all experimental conditions). Users of GPT-4o and Llama 3 had an
observed tendency toward higher estimates of clinical acuity than the
control group, but this result was not significant (Mann–Whitney U
Nature Medicine | Volume 32 | February 2026 | 609–615

Performance in user interactions
To isolate the role of user interactions, we compared the performance
in identifying relevant conditions with different degrees of user involvement. In the user interactions, GPT-4o mentioned a relevant condition in 65.7 ± 6.2% of cases, Llama 3 in 67.0 ± 6.1% and Command R+
in 73.2 ± 5.7% (Fig. 3). Each of these was significantly lower than the
performance of the LLMs alone (Fig. 2) and suggests that necessary
information about the scenario was not communicated between the
user and the model. Despite these correct suggestions appearing in
the conversations, users did not consistently include them in the final
responses, indicating a second breakdown in communication between
the model and user (Fig. 3).
611

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

a

b

Relevant conditions (%, 95% CI)

100

80

60

40

20

0

In response to direct query

In user final response

In response to direct query

In user final response

Disposition (%, 95% CI)

100

80

60

40

20

0

GPT-4o (n = 600)

Llama 3 (n = 600)

Fig. 2 | Performance of LLMs alone and with users. a, The performance on the
LLMs when directly prompted to complete each task alone. Top, the proportion
of LLM responses that identified relevant conditions. Bottom, the proportion of
LLM responses correctly identifying the best disposition. b, The performance
of participants across the four experimental conditions. Top: the proportion
of participant responses that identified relevant conditions. Bottom: the
proportion of participant responses correctly identifying the best disposition.

Relevant conditions (%)

100

80

60

40

20

0

GPT-4o (n = 600)

Mentioned in user interaction
Llama 3 (n = 600)

Command R+ (n = 600)

Fig. 3 | Identification of relevant conditions in interaction. The proportion
of responses where at least one condition from the gold-standard list
(Supplementary Table 11) was mentioned during the interaction between the
participants and LLMs. Data are presented as mean values with unadjusted 95%
CIs for proportions. Markers indicate means for each scenario.

To measure whether participants received accurate suggestions
from LLMs, we searched each conversation to identify which medical
conditions were mentioned (‘Condition extraction’ in Methods). We
found that, on average, LLMs suggested 2.21 (2.12–2.32 95% CI) possible conditions per interaction, of which only 34.0% (32.3–35.9% 95%
CI) were correct. After their interactions with LLMs, participants were
asked to list all relevant conditions and listed 1.33 (1.28–1.38 95% CI)
Nature Medicine | Volume 32 | February 2026 | 609–615

Command R+ (n = 600)

Control (n = 600)

The control group was significantly better than those using LLMs at identifying
relevant conditions. Differences in disposition accuracy were not statistically
significant. Data are presented as mean values with unadjusted 95% CIs for
proportions. Markers indicate means for each scenario. Using LLMs worsened
or did not improve participant performance on these tasks relative to using
traditional resources, and the models consistently performed better without
user interaction.

on average. We found that user final responses had only slightly better precision, 38.7% (36.3–41.4% 95% CI), than the combination of all
the intermediate conditions mentioned by LLMs. This indicates that
participants may not be able to identify the best conditions suggested
by LLMs.
To better understand the mechanisms that lead to lower performance in human–LLM interactions, we analyzed a random selection
of 30 interactions, one for each combination of model and scenario.
For each selected interaction, we read the interaction transcript and
recorded (1) whether the user had provided sufficient information to
correctly identify the condition in their initial message, (2) whether
the user had provided sufficient information over the course of the
interaction, (3) the accuracy of any suggestions made by the model
and (4) whether the user ultimately followed the recommendation
of the model. We also noted interactions that demonstrated unique
dynamics between LLM and user.
Overall, users often failed to provide the models with sufficient
information to reach a correct recommendation. In 16 of 30 sampled
interactions, initial messages contained only partial information (see
Extended Data Table 1 for a transcript example). In 7 of these 16 interactions, users mentioned additional symptoms later, either in response
to a question from the model or independently.
LLMs generated several types of misleading and incorrect information. In two cases, LLMs provided initially correct responses but added
new and incorrect responses after the users added additional details. In
two other cases, LLMs did not provide a broad response but narrowly
expanded on a single term within the user’s message (‘pre-eclampsia‘
and ‘Saudi Arabia’) that was not central to the scenario. LLMs also made
612

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

Passing score

Passing score

100

Experimental relevant
conditions accuracy (%)

Experimental disposition
accuracy (%)

a
80
60
40
20
0

0

20

40

60

80

100

100
80
60
40
20
0

0

Question-answering benchmark accuracy (%)

b

100

60

80

100

80

Human user
accuracy (%)

80

Human user
accuracy (%)

40

100

60
40
20
0

20

Question-answering benchmark accuracy (%)

0

20

40

60

80

100

60
40
20
0

0

20

40

60

80

Simulated user accuracy (%)

Simulated user accuracy (%)

Disposition

Relevant condition
Command R+

GPT-4o

100

Llama 3

Fig. 4 | Model baselines. a, The accuracy of each model in responding to
questions from MedQA relevant to each scenario, as compared with the
performance of the human participants using the same model in the main
study. Data are presented as mean values for each scenario and model. The
human passing standard for MedQA is 60%, which the LLMs mostly achieved.
Scores on question-answering are higher than the corresponding scores in user

interactions in 26 out of 30 cases for the dispositions and all 30 cases for relevant
conditions. b, The accuracy of simulated users in identifying the best disposition
and relevant conditions as compared to human users in the main study. Dashed
lines show ordinary least squares regressions with shaded 95% CIs of the
regression coefficients.

errors in contextual understanding by, for example, recommending
calling a partial US phone number and, in the same interaction, recommending calling ‘Triple Zero’, the Australian emergency number. Comparing across scenarios, we also noticed inconsistency in how LLMs
responded to semantically similar inputs. In an extreme case, two users
sent very similar messages describing symptoms of a subarachnoid
hemorrhage but were given opposite advice (Extended Data Table 2).
One user was told to lie down in a dark room, and the other user was
given the correct recommendation to seek emergency care. Despite
all these issues, we also observed successful interactions where the
user redirected the conversation away from mistakes, indicating that
non-expert users could effectively manage LLM errors in certain cases
(Extended Data Table 3).
Participants employed a broad range of strategies when interacting with LLMs. Several users primarily asked closed-ended questions
(for example, ‘Could this be related to stress?’), which constrained the
possible responses from LLMs. When asked to justify their choices, two
users appeared to have made decisions by anthropomorphizing LLMs
and considering them human-like (for example, ‘the AI seemed pretty
confident’). On the other hand, one user appeared to have deliberately
withheld information that they later used to test the correctness of
the conditions suggested by the model.

accuracy on MedQA than users did when using the LLMs in the main
study (GPT-4o, 20 out of 20 cases; Llama 3, 19 out of 20 cases; Command
R+, 17 out of 20 cases). The approximate standard for a passing score
is 60%, which the models typically achieved4. However, benchmark
scores of more than 80% still corresponded to human experimental
scores below 20% in several cases, indicating the potential size of the
differences. Success in question-answering tasks is not a sufficient
indication of whether the same information will be effectively applied
to real-world tasks.

Question-answering benchmarks
To assess how well question-answering benchmarks predicted performance in user deployments, we scored the LLMs on a targeted subset of
the popular MedQA benchmark4. Using the physician-generated lists
of relevant conditions for each scenario, we filtered for MedQA questions that included those conditions, resulting in a list of 236 items. We
then scored the LLMs for accuracy on these multiple-choice questions
using standard five-shot prompting20,27.
Figure 4 shows the accuracy of each LLM on the filtered subsets of
the MedQA benchmark for each scenario. LLMs consistently had higher
Nature Medicine | Volume 32 | February 2026 | 609–615

Simulated patient interactions
To compare with benchmarks based on interactions with simulated
patients, we conducted a variant of our human subject experiment
with the participants replaced by LLMs. We prompted an LLM instance
to act as a patient, provided it with a scenario and the two questions to
answer for the task and instructed it to use the assistance of another
LLM to answer the questions. The ‘patient’ LLM was instructed to begin
a conversation with the assistant, and then chat messages were passed
between the two models until the ‘patient’ model answered the two task
questions. Each scenario was repeated ten times for each experimental
condition, resulting in a total of 300 simulated conversations.
Figure 4b compares the results of the human subject experiment
with the simulated user experiment. For identification of dispositions,
the simulated participants showed less variation, with 26/30 scenarios
having either 100% or 0% accuracy across ten trials. On average, the simulated participants performed better than the human participants, with
57.3% ± 5.6% accuracy in determining a disposition and 60.7% ± 5.5%
accuracy in identifying relevant conditions. Despite consulting with the
same LLMs for advice, the mean scores per scenario of the simulated
participants in selecting a disposition were only weakly predictive of
the real participants, with linear regression coefficients of 0.33 ± 0.25
for GPT-4o users, 0.31 ± 0.31 for Llama 3 users and 0.20 ± 0.38 for Command R+ users. The scores for identifying relevant conditions showed
613

Article
no relationship at all, with linear regression coefficients of −0.01 ± 0.34
for GPT-4o users, −0.17 ± 0.29 for Llama 3 users and −0.01 ± 0.51 for
Command R+ users. Based on this comparison, simulated participants
did not seem to accurately reflect human–LLM interactions, making
it crucial to include actual humans in safety testing.

Discussion
Our findings highlight the challenges of public deployments of LLMs
for direct patient care. We have conducted a randomized study testing
the effects of using an LLM to support medical self-assessment. Despite
LLMs alone having high proficiency in the task, the combination of LLMs
and human users was no better than the control group in assessing
clinical acuity and worse at identifying relevant conditions. Previous
work has shown that using LLMs does not improve clinical reasoning
in physicians29, and we found that this extends to the general public as
well. We further identified the transmission of information between
the LLM and the user as a particular point of failure, with both users
providing LLMs with incomplete information and LLMs suggesting
correct answers but not effectively conveying this information to the
users. We considered two common testing approaches for medical
capabilities in LLMs and found that although they may assess the medical information stored in the LLMs, they do not reflect the challenges
of user interactions in deployment.
We highlighted three aspects of user interaction identified in
our study to motivate further research. First, over the course of the
interactions, LLMs typically offered 2.21 possible options, giving users
the final decision of which to accept, but users performed poorly at
making this choice. Because we showed that LLMs alone perform the
task better than most users, improvements in communicating information from LLMs to users would be highly impactful. Interactive,
multiturn evaluations like this study are key for better understanding
and improving these capabilities30. Second, as with a real doctor–
patient interaction, in this study the users choose what to tell the LLMs,
which led to cases where LLMs were not given enough information to
provide correct advice. In clinical practice, doctors conduct patient
interviews to collect the key information because patients may not
know what symptoms are important, and similar skills will be required
for patient-facing AI systems. Third, the sensitivity of LLMs to small
variations in inputs creates challenges for forming mental models of
LLM behavior31. Even occasional factual and contextual errors could
lead users to disregard advice from LLMs32. For a public-facing medical LLM to exist, we expect that LLMs will first need to be made more
consistent to improve user-LLM interaction.
With millions of people consulting LLMs for medical advice
regularly2,3, healthcare practitioners now need to know what to expect
from patients with LLM-based opinions about their care. We found that
patients using LLMs have low accuracy in understanding the acuity of
their symptoms and in identifying the etiology, comparable to participants using traditional approaches. Our scenarios focused on common
conditions where users may be familiar with the symptoms, and results
might differ on rare conditions or less typical presentations. Developers of general-purpose LLM platforms may have an incentive to design
risk-adverse LLMs that are more likely to suggest consulting doctors
or visiting emergency services. In this study, we found no significant
evidence that participants who consulted LLMs had higher estimates
of the acuity of their scenarios, with only a small difference observed.
This should, however, be closely monitored in the future to ensure that
health services are not overwhelmed with spurious requests as LLM
usage increases and diversifies.
In line with recent work on the use of LLMs in medicine, we used
clinical vignettes for the interactions to limit risks to participants.
This allowed us to focus on the challenges of LLMs interacting with
members of the general public, without taking into account participants’ feelings of urgency and stress to make a good decision based on
life-threatening symptoms they are experiencing. We recommend that
Nature Medicine | Volume 32 | February 2026 | 609–615

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

once LLMs become successful in scenario-based experiments, testing
could proceed toward increasingly realistic conditions.
In our work, we found that none of the tested language models
were ready for deployment in direct patient care. Despite strong performance from the LLMs alone, both on existing benchmarks and on
our scenarios, medical expertise was insufficient for effective patient
care. Our work can only provide a lower bound on performance: newer
models, models that make use of advanced techniques from chain of
thought to reasoning tokens, or fine-tuned specialized models, are
likely to provide higher performance on medical benchmarks. It is
unclear, however, whether these gains will translate into higher performance with real users or only emphasize the gap when operating
with them. We recommend that developers, as well as policymakers
and regulators, consider human user testing as a foundation for better evaluating interactive capabilities before any future deployments.

Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information,
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

O’Neill, M. ChatGPT diagnoses cause of child’s chronic pain after
17 doctors failed. Independent (13 September 2023).
Presiado, M., Montero, A., Lopes, L. & Hamel, L. KFF Health
Misinformation Tracking Poll: Artificial Intelligence and Health
Information (KFF, 2024).
Shahsavar, Y. & Choudhury, A. User intentions to use ChatGPT
for self-diagnosis and health-related purposes: cross-sectional
survey study. JMIR Hum. Factors 10, e47564 (2023).
Jin, D. et al. What disease does this patient have? A large-scale
open domain question answering dataset from medical exams.
Appl. Sci. 11, 6421 (2021).
Ayers, J. W. et al. Comparing physician and artificial intelligence
chatbot responses to patient questions posted to a public social
media forum. JAMA Intern. Med. 183, 589–596 (2023).
Van Veen, D. et al. Adapted large language models can
outperform medical experts in clinical text summarization. Nat.
Med. 30, 1134–1142 (2024).
Agarwal, N., Moehring, A., Rajpurkar, P. & Salz, T. Combining
Human Expertise with Artificial Intelligence: Experimental Evidence
from Radiology. Working paper 31422 (NBER, 2023).
Brodeur, P. G. et al. Superhuman performance of a large language
model on the reasoning tasks of a physician. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10849 (2024).
Rajpurkar, P. & Topol, E. J. The robot doctor will see you now.
New York Times (2 February 2025).
Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P. & Massey, C. Algorithm aversion:
people erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. J. Exp.
Psychol. Gen. 144, 114–126 (2015).
Babic, B., Gerke, S., Evgeniou, T. & Cohen, I. G. Beware
explanations from AI in health care. Science 373, 284–286
(2021).
Doshi, A. R. & Hauser, O. P. Generative artificial intelligence
enhances creativity but reduces the diversity of novel content.
Sci. Adv. 10, eadn5290 (2024).
Digital access – a ‘front door to the NHS’. NHS England South East
https://www.england.nhs.uk/south-east/info-professionals/
south-east-region-primary-care-transformation-programme/
introduction/digital-access-a-front-door-to-the-nhs/ (2025).
Kyle, P. AI opportunities action plan. GOV.UK www.gov.uk/
government/publications/ai-opportunities-action-plan/
ai-opportunities-action-plan (2025).
614

Article
15. Catalyzing equitable artificial intelligence (AI) use to improve
global health. Global Grand Challenges https://gcgh.
grandchallenges.org/challenge/catalyzing-equitable-artificialintelligence-ai-use (2023).
16. US Department of Health and Human Services. HHS releases
strategic plan for the use of artificial intelligence to enhance and
protect the health and well-being of Americans. https://www.hhs.
gov/about/news/2025/01/10/hhs-releases-strategic-plan-useartificial-intelligence-enhance-protect-health-well-beingamericans.html (2025).
17. Haupt, C. E. & Marks, M. AI-generated medical advice—GPT and
beyond. JAMA 329, 1349–1350 (2023).
18. Lee, P., Bubeck, S. & Petro, J. Benefits, limits, and risks of GPT-4
as an AI chatbot for medicine. N. Engl. J. Med. 388, 1233–1239
(2023).
19. Moor, M. et al. Foundation models for generalist medical artificial
intelligence. Nature 616, 259–265 (2023).
20. Singhal, K. et al. Large language models encode clinical
knowledge. Nature 620, 172–180 (2023).
21. Tu, T. et al. Towards generalist biomedical AI. NEJM AI
https://doi.org/10.1056/AIoa2300138 (2024).
22. Nori, H., King, N., McKinney, S. M., Carignan, D. & Horvitz, E.
Capabilities of GPT-4 on medical challenge problems. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13375 (2023).
23. Schmidgall, S. et al. AgentClinic: A multimodal agent benchmark
to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.07960 (2024).
24. Johri, S. et al. An evaluation framework for clinical use of large
language models in patient interaction tasks. Nat. Med. 31, 77–86
(2025).
25. Reis, M., Reis, F. & Kunde, W. Influence of believed AI involvement
on the perception of digital medical advice. Nat. Med. 30,
3098–3100 (2024).
26. Milanovic, K. & Pitt, J. Misattribution of error origination: the
impact of preconceived expectations in co-operative online
games. In Proc. ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
(eds Ju, W. et al.) 707–717 (ACM, 2021).

Nature Medicine | Volume 32 | February 2026 | 609–615

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y
27. Saab, K. et al. Capabilities of Gemini models in medicine. Preprint
at https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18416 (2024).
28. Tu, T. et al. Towards conversational diagnostic artificial
intelligence. Nature 642, 442–450 (2024).
29. Goh, E. et al. Large language model influence on diagnostic
reasoning: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw. Open 7,
e2440969 (2024).
30. Ibrahim, L. et al. Towards interactive evaluations for interaction
harms in human-AI systems. In Proc. Eighth AAAI/ACM Conference
on AI, Ethics, and Society 1302–1310 (AAAI, 2025).
31. Wilder, B., Horvitz, E. & Kamar, E. Learning to complement
humans. In Proc. 29th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (ed. Bessiere, C.) 1526–1533 (ACM, 2020).
32. Jones-Jang, S. M. & Park, Y. J. How do people react to AI
failure? Automation bias, algorithmic aversion, and perceived
controllability. J. Comput. Mediate. Commun. 28, zmac029
(2023).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format,
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2026, modified publication 2026

615

Article

Methods
The study employed a between-subjects design with three treatment
groups and a control. Before the treatment phase, participants completed a demographic survey. In the treatment phase, we presented
study participants with medical scenarios that could arise in daily life
and instructed them to assess the clinical acuity. Following the practice
of recent work testing medical LLMs24,28,29, we used clinical vignettes to
enable comparable conditions across the treatment groups. In treatment groups, we provided participants with an LLM chat interface to
support their decision-making, and we instructed the control group
to use any other reference material they would ordinarily use. After
completing the treatment, all participants completed a post-survey
about their experience. Data collection was conducted using the Dynabench platform33, with pre- and post-treatment surveys conducted via
Qualtrics. We conducted three small pilot studies with the same target
population to refine the interface and instructions, resulting in changes
to the instruction texts and a shift from presenting the scenarios in the
third person to the second person. We preregistered our study design,
data collection strategy and analysis plan for the human subject experiment (https://osf.io/dt2p3). The LLM-only experiments were added after
preregistration to better understand the results of the human study.

Participants
We used Prolific to recruit 1,298 participants to collect 2,400 conversations. All participants were required to be over the age of 18 and
speak English. Data collection was run between 21 August 2024 and
14 October 2024. We used stratified random sampling via the Prolific
platform to target a representative sample of the UK population in each
group. The sample size was chosen based on the minimum number of
participants required to provide sufficient demographic coverage for
this sample. The participants were paid £2.25 each. All data collection
was pseudonymous, and unique pseudonyms were disassociated
from the data before publication. Informed consent was obtained
from all participants. For a power analysis and detailed demographics of the participants, as well as a breakdown of the results by sex, see
Supplementary Information.
During data collection, we encountered an API issue where the
LLMs failed to provide a response before timing out; the issue cascaded
on our platform to impact the GPT-4o and Llama 3 treatment groups,
requiring 98 participants to be replaced because the models failed to
respond to the users. We paid all of the impacted participants. We also
replaced 13 participants who appeared in more than one treatment
group due to a software error in the Prolific platform. Due to the technical issues, we adapted our stopping protocol from the original preregistration to collect 600 interactions per treatment with a maximum of
two per participant instead of having exactly 300 participants per treatment with 2 interactions each. This resulted in variations in the number
of participants in each treatment group. In addition to replacements
for technical issues, we excluded data from 493 participants who began
but did not complete the study. Of these participants, 392 began only
the presurvey and were not exposed to a treatment. For the remaining
101, we found no evidence of an association between attrition rate and
treatment group, with 26 dropping out from the GPT-4o treatment, 30
from the Llama 3 treatment, 25 from the Command R+ treatment and
20 from the control group (χ2(3) = 0.948, d.f. = 3, P = 0.814).
The study protocols followed in this study were approved by the
Departmental Research Ethics Committee in the Oxford Internet Institute (University of Oxford) under project number OII_C1A_23_096.
Methods were carried out in accordance with the relevant guidelines
and regulations. Informed consent was obtained from all participants
before enrollment in the study.

Presurvey
Before the interaction phase, we collected information from participants about their backgrounds. We asked participants to report their
Nature Medicine

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

level of education, English fluency, internet usage habits, medical
expertise and experience using LLMs. Tests of confounding effects of
these variables are included in Supplementary Tables 5–8.

Treatments
Participants were assigned to one of three treatment groups or a control. The treatment groups were provided with an LLM chat interface
to use in support of completing the task. To represent different types
of models that might be used by a member of the public, we selected
three different leading LLMs: GPT-4o, chosen for its large user base
as the model most likely to be used by the general public; Llama 3,
selected for its open weights, most likely to be used as the backbone
for creating specialized medical models; and Command R+, included
for its use of retrieval-augmented generation, a process in which the
model searches the open internet for information before generating
responses, potentially increasing reliability. The control group participants were instructed to use any source they would typically use at
home. Post-treatment surveys indicated that most participants used a
search engine or went directly to trusted websites, most often the NHS
website (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Extended Data Table 4.) Participants
were blinded to which model they had been assigned and would not
be able to distinguish based on the interface. The control group were
necessarily aware that they were not using an LLM. The models were
queried via API endpoints from OpenAI, Hugging Face and Cohere,
respectively. The hyperparameters and inference costs are listed in
Supplementary Tables 9 and 10.

Scenarios
We assigned each participant two scenarios to complete consecutively.
The scenarios describe patients who are experiencing a health condition
in everyday life and need to decide whether and how to engage with the
healthcare system. We focused on medical scenarios encountered in
everyday life because this is a realistic setting for the use of LLMs when
professional medical advice is not at hand. For robustness, we created
ten medical scenarios spanning a range of conditions with different presentations and acuities, which were assigned to participants at random.
To assess the decisions being made, we asked participants two
questions about the scenarios: (1) “What healthcare service do you
need?” and (2) “Why did you make the choice you did? Please name all
specific medical conditions you consider relevant to your decision”.
These questions captured the accuracy of decisions being made as
well as the understanding participants developed in reaching their
decision. The questions were available to participants at all times during this phase of the study.
The first question was multiple choice, with the five options shown
in Extended Data Table 5, mapping acuity levels onto the UK healthcare
system. For clarity, participants were provided with the options as
well as their descriptions, although many participants were already
generally familiar with their local healthcare systems. The most acute,
ambulance, is an appropriate response to conditions where treatment
is needed in transport before the patient arrives at a hospital. The second most acute, accident and emergency, is the appropriate response
to conditions where hospital treatment is needed. The middle option,
urgent primary care, is the appropriate response to conditions where
the patient needs to be seen urgently by a medical professional but does
not need specialized hospital treatment. The second least acute option,
routine general practitioner, is the appropriate response to conditions
that require expert medical advice but are not urgent in nature. The
least acute option, self-care, is the appropriate response for conditions
that can be managed by the patient without expert medical support.
The second question was free response. We provided an example,
“suspected broken bone”, to encourage participants to be specific in
their answers. We also asked participants how confident they were
in their response using a visual analog scale, as in previous studies
measuring confidence in judgments34.

Article
We created ten new medical scenarios under the direction of three
physicians and established gold-standard responses based on assessments by four additional physicians. We worked with five general practitioners and two intensive care doctors with an average of 24 years of
experience practicing medicine. We initially drafted ten scenarios using
‘Clinical Knowledge Summaries’ from the UK National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines35. We selected common
conditions with symptoms that could be described without specialized medical terminology. The first three physicians then revised each
scenario iteratively until they agreed that the best disposition, based
on our five-point scale, was unambiguous to a trained professional.
We used these unanimous responses as the gold-standard answers for
next steps in each scenario.
The four other physicians then reviewed the scenarios without
knowing the intended responses and provided a list of differential
diagnoses and ‘red flag’ conditions for each scenario. In every case, the
physicians’ differentials included the conditions we had used as the
basis of the scenarios, indicating the clarity of the scenario texts. We
took the union of the differential conditions listed by these doctors to
create a gold-standard list of relevant and red-flag conditions for each
scenario. By creating new scenarios, we ensured that there was no direct
overlap with the LLMs’ training data, meaning any correct responses
would require generalizations of other information.
Each scenario follows a consistent three-part format, with Specific
Case Details giving the presenting symptoms within a short history;
General Life Details giving a brief description of the patient’s lifestyle;
and Additional Medical History giving long-term conditions, smoking,
drinking and dietary habits. Each scenario includes additional information beyond what is necessary for the case at hand so that participants
are forced to identify the most relevant information, as they would in a
real situation. Scenarios are written in the second person (for example,
‘You have a persistent headache…’) based on common practice36,37.
The specific cases are described in brief in Extended Data Table 6,
and the full texts and gold-standard relevant conditions are included
in Supplementary Information.

Scoring
We scored the question responses for accuracy in assessing the clinical acuity. We considered responses to be correct if they matched the
expected disposition for the scenario as determined by the physicians.
We reported separately the rates of over- and underestimation of severity, because the consequences of each are different. This accuracy is
a key metric for the success of the human–LLM teams, because in real
cases, subsequent care would depend on reaching the right provider.
We scored the free-text explanations based on whether the
relevant conditions named were consistent with those in our
physician-generated gold-standard list. Because we asked participants
to list ‘all’ potentially relevant conditions, rather than penalizing wrong
answers, an answer was counted as correct if one of the mentioned conditions matched a gold-standard condition. Participants listed an average of 1.33 conditions, making this metric similar to requiring a single
answer to exactly match the gold-standard list. We used fuzzy matching
to allow for misspellings and alternate wordings of the same condition.
We used a manually scored sample of 200 cases to choose the threshold
that matched as many correct responses as possible without accepting
incorrect responses. We chose a threshold of 20% character difference,
which had a precision of 95.8% and a recall of 95.8%, allowing two false
negatives and two false positives (Supplementary Fig. 6).

Statistical methods
All statistics were computed using the STATSMODELS v0.14.3 and SCIPY
v1.13.0 packages in Python. Comparisons between proportions were
computed using χ2 tests with 1 d.f., equivalent to a two-sided Z-test.
Two-sided Mann–Whitney U tests were used to test the probability of
responses from each treatment group rating the acuity more highly
Nature Medicine

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

than the control, and to assess the tendency of the participants to
over- or underestimate the acuity of their conditions, to include information about the degree of errors, with the common language effect
U
size, f = n1 n2 , used to report the effect size.
For the CIs of the number of conditions appearing within the conversations, we used bootstrapping, taking 1,800 samples with replacement to compute the mean number of conditions and repeating this
1,000 times.
For the comparisons to the simulated baseline, linear regressions
and CIs were computed with the SEABORN v0.13.2 regression plot
function as well as STATSMODELS.

Post-survey
Following the interactive phase, we asked patients to provide commentary on their experience. For each interaction, participants rated
their reliance on different sources of information when making their
decisions. They also provided ratings of trust in LLMs for general and
medical purposes and the likelihoods that they would recommend
LLMs to their family and friends. Results of the post-survey are included
in Extended Data Figure 1.

Condition extraction
To identify how many conditions were mentioned by the LLMs in each
interaction, we used GPT-4o to extract a list of conditions. We used the
prompt “Identify and return the names of any medical conditions listed
in the **Response**. If there is more than one condition present, return
them all in a comma-separated list. If there are no conditions present,
then return ‘None’. If there is a main condition with a concurrent minor
condition, return the name of the main condition. Do not explain”.
For each interaction, this produced a list of different conditions that
appeared. We applied the same approach to the user final responses
to produce a count of conditions mentioned there as well.

Direct model prompting
To test the medical assessment abilities of the models independent of
the users, we prompted each model with the text of the scenarios and
asked directly for the answers to the same questions provided to the
users. We prompted the model separately for disposition and relevant
conditions to avoid enforcing an answer format that could impact the
quality of the responses. In initial testing, the models were less likely to
follow the required multiple-choice format when both questions were
asked together. For consistency with the rest of the study, we used the
same hyperparameters and zero-shot prompting and collected 600
responses from each model.

Question-answering baseline
To compare with the performance of these models on existing benchmarks, we scored each model on the subset of MedQA4 that was most
relevant to our scenarios. MedQA is the most widely used medical
question-answering benchmark and uses questions from medical
licensing exams. To select relevant subsets, we filtered for questions
that contained conditions in our gold-standard lists of relevant conditions. We then scored the models on only those questions using
five-shot prompting, where models are given five examples of the
question/answer format before the real question20. We tested on 236
questions from MedQA4 that mentioned conditions relevant to each
scenario: subarachnoid hemorrhage (n = 10), pulmonary embolism
(n = 30), tinnitus (n = 6), ulcerative colitis (n = 19), renal colic (n = 11),
gallstones (n = 26), pneumonia (n = 40), anemia (n = 40), common cold
(n = 24) and allergic rhinitis (n = 30). Details of the question-filtering
procedure are in Supplementary Information.

Simulated participants baseline
To compare with the performance of these models on tasks with simulated users, we replicated the human study experimental design with

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

LLM-simulated participants adapted from previous works. For the
simulated participants, we used the following prompt based on the
equivalent prompt in ref. 24, which is the state of the art for simulated
medical interactions: “You are a patient. You do not have any medical
knowledge. You have to self-assess your symptoms from the given case
vignette and assistance from an AI model. Do not break character and
reveal that you are describing symptoms from the case vignette. Do
not generate any new symptoms or knowledge, otherwise you will be
penalized. Remember, you are the patient. Simplify terminology used
in the given paragraph to layman language and keep your questions or
statements reasonably short”.
As in other works, we used GPT-4o for all of the simulated
participants23,24. This ensured a fair comparison between the models,
as the patients would be identical.

Acknowledgements

Reporting summary

A.M.B., L.R. and A.M. were involved in the conceptualization of the
study. A.M.B., R.P., G.P., H.R.K., L.R. and A.M. contributed to the
methodology. R.E.P., G.P. and A.S.E. provided medical expertise and
created the scenarios. A.M.B., J.C., R.M.-G. and S.H.M. contributed
code for the data collection and analysis. A.M.B. conducted the formal
analysis with validation and supervision from L.R. and A.M. A.M.B.
wrote the initial draft, with input from R.E.P., H.R.K., L.T., L.R. and A.M.
Visualizations were created by A.M.B., H.R.K. and L.R. All authors
reviewed and approved the content of the study and are personally
responsible for their contributions as stated here.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Data availability
The datasets generated by the experimental research during the current study are available at https://github.com/am-bean/HELPMed as
well as https://huggingface.co/datasets/ambean/HELPMed/. The full
text of the scenarios is available in Supplementary Information and at
https://huggingface.co/datasets/ambean/HELPMed/viewer/default/
scenarios.

Code availability
All code used to generate the analysis in the manuscript is shared by
the authors for reuse and is available at https://github.com/am-bean/
HELPMed.

References

33. Kiela, D. et al. Dynabench: rethinking benchmarking in NLP. In
Proc. Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(eds Toutanova, K. et al.) 4110–4124 (ACL, 2021).
34. Rahnev, D. et al. The confidence database. Nat. Hum. Behav. 4,
317–325 (2020).
35. NICE guidance. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
36. Vollmar, H. C., Ostermann, T. & Redaèlli, M. Using the scenario
method in the context of health and health care – a scoping
review. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 15, 89 (2015).
37. Xiong, K. Z., Shah, S., Stone, J. A., Jacobson, N. & Chui, M. A. Using
a scenario-based hybrid approach to understand participant
health behavior. Res. Soc. Adm. Pharm. 17, 2070 (2021).

Nature Medicine

A.M. acknowledges support from Prolific and support for the
Dynabench platform from the Data-centric Machine Learning Working
Group at MLCommons. A.M. and A.M.B. were partially supported by
the Oxford Internet Institute’s Research Programme funded by the
Dieter Schwarz Stiftung gGmbH. L.R. acknowledges support from the
Royal Society Research grant no. RG\R2\232035 and the UKRI Future
Leaders Fellowship (grant no. MR/Y015711/1). L.T. was supported by
the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Oxford Biomedical
Research Centre (BRC). The views expressed are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of
Health. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.

Author contributions

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information

Extended data is available for this paper at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y.
Supplementary information The online version
contains supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Adam Mahdi.
Peer review information Nature Medicine thanks Avishek Choudhury
and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the
peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editor: Lorenzo Righetto, in
collaboration with the Nature Medicine team.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
www.nature.com/reprints.

Article

Extended Data Fig. 1 | Post-survey. (Upper Left) Self-reported confidence
in urgency assessments, conditioned on the subsequent accuracy of the
assessment. Box plots present median values (solid line), mean values (dashed
line), boxes corresponding to the Q1-Q3 quartiles and whiskers corresponding
to Q1/Q3 ± 1.5IQR. Confidence tends to be higher when responses are correct
(Two-sided t-test, p < 0.0001). In aggregate, mean confidence is higher for the
Control group than the Command R+ group (Two-sided t-test with Bonferroni
adjustment for 3 comparisons, p = 0.002), but similar to Llama 3 80B (p = 0.129)
and GPT-4o (p = 0.754). (Upper Right) Participants ratings as to whether they
would recommend LLMs to friends or family for medical purposes or general

Nature Medicine

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

use. Participants in the GPT-4o group were more likely than those in the Control
group to recommend using LLMs for medical purposes (Two-sided t-test with
Bonferroni adjustment for 3 comparisons, p < 0.0001) or general use (p <
0.0001). The other groups showed no significant difference to the control (Llama
3, p = 0.662, p = 0.527; Command R+, p = 0.333, p = 0.370). Data are presented
as violin plots with means. (Lower) Participants reported the degree to which
they relied on each potential source of information. Cells show mean next step
accuracy and condition identification accuracy for users reporting each degree
of influence by source, with counts per cell in parenthesis.

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

Extended Data Table 1 | Interaction Transcript: Incomplete Information

The transcript of a participant-model interaction from the dataset. In this case, the model is Command R+ and the scenario is ‘gallstones’. Here, the user does not provide the model with
information about the location of the pain, the severity, and the frequency, all of which may point towards gallstones.

Nature Medicine

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

Extended Data Table 2 | Interaction Transcript: Inconsistent Responses

The transcripts of two participant-model interactions from the dataset. In both of these converstaions, the model is GPT-4o and the scenario is ‘subarachnoid haemorrhage’. Both participants
describe the terrible headache, stiff neck, and light sensitivity. Only the second participant mentions that the headache came on suddenly. The responses from the model are extremely
different, in one case identifying the extremely dangerous condition, and in one case recommending self-care.

Nature Medicine

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

Extended Data Table 3 | Interaction Transcript: Recovered Interaction

The transcript of a participant-model interaction from the dataset. In this case, the model is Llama 3 and the scenario is ‘renal colic’. Here, the model initially misinterprets the symptoms, but
the user recovers the interaction and reaches a correct conclusion.

Nature Medicine

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

Extended Data Table 4 | Post-survey Sources of Information

The self-reported degree to which participants relied on each source of information by treatment group. Relative to the treatment groups, the Control group was less likely to rely on an
LLM (Two-sided Mann-Whitney U n1 = n2 = 600, GPT-4o: f = . 755, p < 0.0001; Llama 3: F = . 715, p < 0.0001; Command R+: F = . 287, p < 0.0001) and more likely to rely on search (Two-sided
Mann-Whitney U n1 = n2 = 600, GPT-4o: F = . 297, p < 0.0001; Llama 3: F = . 281, p < 0.0001; Command R+: F = . 726, p < 0.0001), providing evidence of compliance with the treatments. Including
the limited non-compliance, interpreting the results based on the intention to treat reflects the effect of instructing participants to use LLMs. AI search overviews were in limited use at the
time of data collection, but optional free-text comments from the control group indicated that the NHS website was often the ultimate source of information for participants using a search
engine.

Nature Medicine

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

Extended Data Table 5 | Healthcare system entry points

Participants are asked to identify the correct response to each scenario by selecting the best next step on a five-point scale modelled after entry points to the NHS. Explanations are provided
to avoid differences in interpretation or idiosyncratic practical considerations.

Nature Medicine

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-04074-y

Extended Data Table 6 | Medical scenarios

A list of the medical scenarios used in the study. Each scenario was drafted and reviewed by a team of three practicing physicians, and proposed differential diagnoses were collected from an
additional four physicians with expertise in general practice. As these are excerpts, the correct assessment may not be clear without additional context. For the complete scenario texts, see
the Supplementary Materials.

Nature Medicine

